Several Artificial Intelligence-based models have been developed for COVID-19 disease diagnosis. In spite of the
promise of artificial intelligence, there are very few models which bridge the gap between traditional humancentered diagnosis and the potential future of machine-centered disease diagnosis. Under the concept of
human-computer interaction design, this study proposes a new explainable artificial intelligence method that
exploits graph analysis for feature visualization and optimization for the purpose of COVID-19 diagnosis from
blood test samples. In this developed model, an explainable decision forest classifier is employed to COVID-19
classification based on routinely available patient blood test data. The approach enables the clinician to use
the decision tree and feature visualization to guide the explainability and interpretability of the prediction
model. By utilizing this novel feature selection phase, the proposed diagnosis model will not only improve
diagnosis accuracy but decrease the execution time as well. 1. Introduction In the first four months following the outbreak, the pandemic disease
caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus called COVID-19 has infected between
3 and 5 million people and caused at least 200,000 deaths in more than
200 countries of the world. As a result of the outbreak of COVID-19,
governments throughout the world have taken drastic measures like
quarantining hundreds of millions of residents [1,2].
Coronavirus is still a worldwide health concern; by 1st March 2022,
there had been 438 million positive cases and 5.9 million deaths [3].
Among the essential factors contributing to the increase in deaths caused
by COVID-19 infection, one shall mention social disparities in accessing
to early diagnosis tests, and shortage of hospital equipment for clinical
critically cases. Currently, more than two years after the COVID-19 pandemic onset,
a number of vaccines have been developed, and the vaccination pro­
cedure is proceeding at a promising but heterogenous pace between
countries. While developed countries are more likely to have access to
vaccines, other countries face multiple obstacles to vaccination, such as
not having enough vaccine doses to protect vulnerable groups. Addi­
tionally, there are no confirmed medications to cure patients infected
people. As a result, it remains important to screen patients suspected of being infected with COVID-19.
A primary and trustworthy diagnosis of positive COVID-19 patients is
essential to prevent and limit of its prevalence [4]. Reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction, referred RT-PCR, is currently the gold
standard for COVID-19 screening and is uniquely recommended by
World Health Organization (WHO); but it has main defects as well: delay
on turnaround times [5], a deficiency of reagents [6], suffers from a low
sensitivity (60–71%) [7], longer waiting time for the results [6,8], a high
false-negative rate of 15–20% [6], the need for certified laboratories [6],
costly equipment [9], and requiring specialist staff [6]. For these rea­
sons, scientists are looking for alternative faster, more accessible, and
affordable diagnosis techniques. Impressive improvements in machine learning models are rejuve­nating the application of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in healthcare that
basically started over half a century ago [10]. In the field of COVID-19
disease diagnosis, the utilization of chest X-ray and CT-scan imaging is
already populated in many developing countries such as India, Africa,
South- America due to insufficient number of RT-PCR test-kits, and the
established link between the ground-glass opacity occurrence in the
periphery of lungs and SARS-Cov-2 [11–15], although with some limited
success [16]. At limited scale, cough sound analysis has been suggested
to discriminate COVID-19 patients [17]. Finally, laboratory data
