Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100941 Available online 6 April 2022 2352 9148   2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY NC ND license   http   creativecommons.org licenses by  nc nd 4.0   .A novel explainable COVID 19 diagnosis method by integration of feature  selection with random forest  Mehrdad Rostamia    Mourad Oussalaha b  aCentre for Machine Vision and Signal Processing  Faculty of Information Technology  University of Oulu  Oulu  Finland  bResearch Unit of Medical Imaging  Physics  and Technology  Faculty of Medicine  University of Oulu  Finland    ARTICLE INFO   Keywords   Explainable artificial intelligence  Human computer interaction  Disease diagnosis  COVID 19  Decision forest  Feature selection ABSTRACT   Several Artificial Intelligence based models have been developed for COVID 19 disease diagnosis. In spite of the  promise of artificial intelligence  there are very few models which bridge the gap between traditional human   centered diagnosis and the potential future of machine centered disease diagnosis. Under the concept of  human computer interaction design  this study proposes a new explainable artificial intelligence method that  exploits graph analysis for feature visualization and optimization for the purpose of COVID 19 diagnosis from  blood test samples. In this developed model  an explainable decision forest classifier is employed to COVID 19  classification based on routinely available patient blood test data. The approach enables the clinician to use  the decision tree and feature visualization to guide the explainability and interpretability of the prediction  model. By utilizing this novel feature selection phase  the proposed diagnosis model will not only improve  diagnosis accuracy but decrease the execution time as well.    1.Introduction  In the first four months following the outbreak  the pandemic disease  caused by the SARS CoV 2 virus called COVID 19 has infected between  3 and 5 million people and caused at least 200 000 deaths in more than  200 countries of the world. As a result of the outbreak of COVID 19   governments throughout the world have taken drastic measures like  quarantining hundreds of millions of residents  1 2 .  Coronavirus is still a worldwide health concern  by 1st March 2022   there had been 438 million positive cases and 5.9 million deaths  3 .  Among the essential factors contributing to the increase in deaths caused  by COVID 19 infection  one shall mention social disparities in accessing  to early diagnosis tests  and shortage of hospital equipment for clinical  critically cases.  Currently  more than two years after the COVID 19 pandemic onset   a number of vaccines have been developed  and the vaccination pro  cedure is proceeding at a promising but heterogenous pace between  countries. While developed countries are more likely to have access to  vaccines  other countries face multiple obstacles to vaccination  such as  not having enough vaccine doses to protect vulnerable groups. Addi  tionally  there are no confirmed medications to cure patients infected  people. As a result  it remains important to screen patients suspected of being infected with COVID 19.  A primary and trustworthy diagnosis of positive COVID 19 patients is  essential to prevent and limit of its prevalence  4 . Reverse transcription  polymerase chain reaction  referred RT PCR  is currently the gold  standard for COVID 19 screening and is uniquely recommended by  World Health Organization  WHO   but it has main defects as well  delay  on turnaround times  5   a deficiency of reagents  6   suffers from a low  sensitivity  60 71    7   longer waiting time for the results  6 8   a high  false negative rate of 15 20   6   the need for certified laboratories  6    costly equipment  9   and requiring specialist staff  6 . For these rea  sons  scientists are looking for alternative faster  more accessible  and  affordable diagnosis techniques.  Impressive improvements in machine learning models are rejuve   nating the application of Artificial Intelligence  AI  in healthcare that  basically started over half a century ago  10 . In the field of COVID 19  disease diagnosis  the utilization of chest X ray and CT scan imaging is  already populated in many developing countries such as India  Africa   South  America due to insufficient number of RT PCR test kits  and the  established link between the ground glass opacity occurrence in the  periphery of lungs and SARS Cov 2  11 15   although with some limited  success  16 . At limited scale  cough sound analysis has been suggested  to discriminate COVID 19 patients  17 . Finally  laboratory data   Corresponding author.  E mail address  Mehrdad.Rostami oulu.fi  M. Rostami .   Contents lists available at ScienceDirect  Informatics in Medicine Unlocked  u   zkw  s yo kr o     1ow  o to 1m y2w m k o2ty   https   doi.org 10.1016 j.imu.2022.100941  Received 24 January 2022  Received in revised form 1 April 2022  Accepted 1 April 2022   

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100941 2including blood test have also been advocated in Ref.  18  because of the  identified correlation between parameters such as white blood cells   neutrophils  lymphocytes  basophils  monocytes and others with  COVID 19 patients  6 . In essence  the prospect of prognostic bio  markers toward earlier and more targeted treatment has been recog   nized  especially since some patients with COVID 19 develop intense  status  which is associated with a higher risk of hospitalization  19 .  Many of the above developments are to a large extent attributed to  the development in Artificial Intelligence and availability of relevant  large scale clinical dataset related to COVID 19 patients. Indeed  the  improvements in computer systems and data storage technologies have  substantially increased the accumulation of COVID 19 data  which of  fers physicians and researchers a unique opportunity to explore simul   taneously factors influencing patient diagnosis and comprehend various  types of COVID 19  as well as developing new early testing technology  for COVID 19 detection. Although  handling such large scale datasets  raises extra challenge of designing effective data processing and anal  ysis  which are computationally appealing  theoretically sound  and  easily interpretable  20 21 . Nevertheless  AI is already utilized in  COVID 19 decision support systems to aid physicians make diagnosis  and prognosis decisions as pointed out in review papers in Refs.  22 24 .  Especially  AI can i  improve the quality of physicians  decision making  through augmented visualization tools and expert system like  aid  to  decision making systems  ii  decrease the risk of physicians  tiredness  caused by the overload number of consultations and their criticality  and  iii  reduce the problem of simultaneous availability of various clinicians   25 27 .  Furthermore  the interpretability and explainability issues relating to  the modern AI based tools should be taken into account  since these  could further impede their implementation in healthcare applications.  Within machine learning techniques  deep learning approaches  due to  their ability to automatically extract representations from the learning  data that are relevant to their predictions  achieved state of the art re  sults in many areas  e.g.  computer vision  28 29   speech recognition   30 31   and signal processing  32 33 . This motivated researchers to  extend such approach to COVID 19 detection and prediction where it is  commonly it is acknowledged that complex machine learning models  such as deep learning and XGBoost perform better than simple models  such as logistic regression in the COVID 19 diagnosis  16 34 . Despite  their acknowledged performance  the widespread employ of deep  learning models is halted by the capacity of such models to provide  explanations to their findings  in a way to promote transparency  re  sponsibility and ethical considerations when comprehending the out  comes of such models  especially in the light of the new data protection  EU directive on the  right of explanation   35 . This demand is even  more stressed in healthcare sector where any diagnostic error can have  fatal consequences on patient life. This raises the need to equip the  complex deep learning black box models with explanatory modules to  accommodate this new need. For example  a physician should under   stand why a machine learning model provides a given diagnosis and be  able to explain it to the patients. This explains why most of  deep learning models implemented in healthcare field rather act as  protypes and for aid to decision support only  offering the possibility to  the clinician to bypass the model output or seeking an alternative  measurement strategy prior to make clinical decision. This renders  several physicians reticent to utilize machine learning and artificial  intelligence based models that are not straightly explainable  inter  pretable and reliable. Nevertheless  enforcing explainability and trans   parency in deep learning models often comes at the expense of increased  time complexity and  sometimes  even system accuracy. How to balance  accuracy  explainability  and other factors of artificial intelligence in  medical applications remains a challenge today. As a result  not only it is  necessary to develop complex and efficient model to process such  COVID 19 medical data  but also to be able to explain and interpret their  decisions. Research in eXplainable AI  XAI   36 38  aims to provides  tools and method for explaining deep learning models through model approximation  enhanced feature contribution visualization  rule based  generation  among others  enabling either local or global explanation of  the model outcome.  In this medical context  XAI framework proposes generating a series  of machine learning models that 1  Generate more explainable tech  niques while preserving a high rate of diagnosis accuracy  and 2  Pro  vide a model for physicians to explain  understand  trust  and effectively  manage decisions.  This paper contributes to XAI research in medical context by pro  posing a new Explainable Random Forest  FSXRF  method that exploits  social network graph analysis for feature visualization and optimization  for the purpose of COVID 19 detection from blood test samples. The  proposed model includes four principal steps. First  the original features  of COVID 19 dataset are shown as a graph where each feature is indi  cated by a node and the links show the similarities between the corre   sponding features. In the next step  a novel scoring mechanism is  proposed for feature importance calculation. The aim of this step is to  rank different features based on filtering feature weighting. In the next  step  an iterative search mechanism is proposed to choose final features.  Therefore  the proposed features selection mechanism while removing  redundant features  will also eliminate irrelevant features with the label  of COVID 19 dataset. After selecting the final features  in the fourth step   the ensemble Decision Forests classifier is employed to COVID 19  screening in routine blood tests. The proposed strategy has several in  novations compared with the previous intelligent COVID 19 prediction  approaches    1 In contrast to relatively demanding RT PCR method  this study uses  blood tests  which are faster  more accessible  and less expensive  than PCR testing. Therefore  blood tests can potentially provide an  alternative tool for the rapid diagnosis of infected cases and  compensate for the lack of RT PCR and CT scan by serving as an early  detection tool.  2An explainable artificial intelligence decision system based on De  cision Tree  DT  that can support physicians in the COVID 19 diag  nosis with a number of simple and explainable rules is developed and  put forward.   3 Unlike black box deep learning based COVID 19 diagnosis models   which are difficult to explain to physicians  the proposed prediction  model is based on DT that physicians can trust due to its acknowl   edged explainability and transparency.   4 Many of previous prediction model for COVID 19 diagnosis use a  single classifier for final prediction  which reduces their generaliza   tion capabilities. In contrast  our model uses a novel Ensemble  Learning based prediction model  which offered increased predic   tion accuracy.   5 Although  previous explainable machine learning models focused on  sample wise  local  explanations  our method focuses on explaining  the entire dataset  global explanation  via a single model. In this  study  an individual explanation in a graph representation is pro  vided that shows the relative importance of each feature and their  interactions.   6 The developed approach uses a novel graph mining strategy to find  similar features and discard redundant feature  which automatically  comprehends the number of relevant feature unlike other clustering  methods such as k means  39  and fuzzy clustering  40  where some  prior knowledge is required.   7 Our model uses a novel graph based technique to measure feature  score and feature similarities  while traditional models only measure  feature relevance in their feature selection procedure.   8 The developed model employs a social network based technique and  the node centrality measure to propose a heuristic search method. In  comparison with nature inspired methods such as  41   the proposed  method is enough fast and more accurate and can be applied to  medical dataset. The proposed method calculates feature similarities  and then applies a scoring mechanism to allocate an importance M. Rostami and M. Oussalah                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100941 3weight to each feature. Therefore  the developed method satisfies  both objectives of feature relevance and feature redundancy in a  multi objective function. Unlike other multi objective models that  choose a set of non dominated feature in their optimization phase   42 43   the developed search mechanism seeks the optimal feature  set in a reasonable amount of time.  The rest of this paper is structured as below  Section 2 reviews the  previously artificial intelligence based model for COVID 19 disease  diagnosis as well as discusses the concept of explainable artificial in  telligence. The proposed diagnosis model is detailed in Section 3. The  experimental results on COVID 19 dataset are described in Section 4 and  finally  Section 5 explain the conclusion and future works.  2.Background  2.1. Machine learning for Covid 19 detection  Artificial intelligence based models are the promising approaches  employed to aid physicians in the early screening of COVID 19 positive  cases. Moreover  these models decrease the workload of the physicians   increase the accuracy prediction  gives a timely response and precise  treatment for the COVID 19 positive cases. Artificial intelligence based  models are used to prevent and mitigate COVID 19 pandemics by  screening  identifying viruses  and disease diagnosis  repurposing or  repositioning drugs  and predicting and forecasting their future spread.  In the area research of medical prediction of COVID 19  intelligent and  machine learning based models grounded on biomarkers can help  optimize the screening of patients with severe disease  minimizing  mortality and hospitalization  and decreasing care delays  44 .  Deep learning and machine learning are the two major branches of  artificial intelligence. The following subsections discuss the applications  of machine learning and deep learning models to combat and mitigate  the COVID 19 outbreak. Fig. 1 demonstrates the schematic diagram of  artificial intelligence approaches for related COVID 19 outbreak tasks.  These approaches were promising areas of research and development  for the decision making process related to COVID 19 and many studies  are performed to review them as extensively reviewed in several review  papers  e.g.  Refs.  16 45 . We therefore focus herein on works that tackle the issue of feature selection and optimization in machine  learning for COVID 19 detection and prediction  which seems to be  overlooked in previous reviews.  For the early prediction and diagnosis of COVID 19 positive  the  authors of  46  proposed a method based on SVM classifier utilizing  X ray patient data. There are 40 lungs X ray images in this dataset  15 of  which are normal lung images and the remaining 25 are COVID 19  infected chest X ray images. The developed method has high effi  ciency  sensitivity  95.76   specificity  99.7   and accuracy   97.48    indicating the SVM based method can be utilized efficiently  for the diagnosis of COVID 19 cases.  During the past few years  Decision Tree  s reputation has increased  in the medical research and health sector. For example in Ref.  47   a  model based decision tree is proposed for the severity identification of  COVID 19 in children. They obtained reports on 105 children who were  infected between February 1 and March 3 of 2020 from the Chinese  hospital. There were 105 positive children among the 105  including 41  girls and 64 boys. The developed method has high performance.  Too et al.  48  presented a new feature selection method using Hyper  Learning Binary Dragonfly Algorithm search strategy for predicting the  condition of COVID 19 patient with a decreasing number of selected  features with high performance accuracy.  Using time dependent parameters  the authors of  49  proposed a  novel approach for forecasting the dynamic spread of COVID 19. Their  approach advocates an epidemiologic model in time domain to develop  the nonlinear model for dynamic approximation of COVID 19  prevalence.  Using an improved fuzzy clustering algorithm  a novel time series  forecasting method is developed in Ref.  50  for the upcoming  COVID 19 patients and deaths in India. Essentially  this technique con  sists of two steps. In the first step  an improved fuzzy clustering algo  rithm is used to create initial intervals  and then these initial intervals  are updated in the second step in order to create new sub intervals. This  developed technique was evaluated using available COVID 19 and the  results demonstrated that this method was superior to previous methods  in terms of mean square error  root mean square error  and average  forecasting error rate.  In  51   different artificial intelligence based techniques for predic   tion of COVID 19 positivity and severity where K nearest neighbor  Fig. 1.Schematic diagram of artificial intelligence approaches for related COVID 19 outbreak tasks.  M. Rostami and M. Oussalah                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100941 4classifier  Neural Networks  Decision Tree and Partial Least Squares  Discriminant Analysis techniques are compared. Their experimental  results demonstrated that COVID 19 severity can be diagnosed and  predicted using all these classifiers with acceptable accuracy.  In  52   a machine learning based model is proposed for future  intubation prediction among positive COVID 19 cases where the model  forecasts future probability of intubation based on prior vitals  labora   tory  and demographic patient information. The model uses a supervised  prediction technique that employs a sliding window technique to pre  dict the possibility of intubation 72 h after the end of the 24 h sampling  period.  Pahar et al.  53  uses AI model to classify COVID 19 cough using  smartphone audio recordings where several machine learning models  are compared. The authors showed that the residual neural networks  classification model can differentiate between positive coughs and  healthy coughs with an area under the ROC curve of 0.98.  In  54   three machine learning models are proposed to forecast the  likelihood of prolonged length of stay utilizing electronic health record  data from COVID 19 patients and to help hospital systems prepare for  bed capacity needs.  Zhang et al.  55  analyzed the clinical features and outcome of  different positive COVID 19 where nine mortality factors are identified  utilizing a least absolute shrinkage and selection operator regression  technique that are then tested by an artificial neural network algorithm.  In  56   classic machine learning based classification model for  Sentiment Analysis on 72 000 COVID 19 related tweets is evaluated  where several models are compared. The authors show that SVC  Per  ceptron  Passive Aggressive Classifier  and Logistic Regression can  achieve higher than 98  prediction rate in Sentiment Analysis.  Singh et al.  57  examined the performance of transfer learning  technique for intelligent prediction of COVID 19. In this presented  model  a deep learning based approach is developed for COVID 19 CT  image screening. This approach utilized VGG16 and PCA for feature  extraction and feature selection from CT scan data  respectively. Addi  tionally  four classification models are evaluated in the prediction phase   including Convolutional neural networks  Extreme Learning  online  sequential Extreme Learning Machine  and Bagging Ensemble with SVM.  Finding of this paper indicated that the bagging ensemble and SVM had  the highest prediction accuracy in the experiments.  In  58   a novel Joint Classification and Segmentation  JCS  model  was developed for real time and explainable COVID  19 diagnosis using  chest CT images.  Yang et al.  59  proposed a new model for analyzing clinical char  acteristics and predicting death outcomes in severe COVID 19 patients.  The authors developed a clinically useful and easily interpretable  DT based model to help clinicians rapidly identify COVID 19 patients  with high mortality risks.  Using human respiratory sounds such as voice  dry cough  and  breath  Lella and Pja  60  introduced a deep learning based method to  diagnose COVID 19 disease. The method employs multi feature channels  to extract deep features from the patient data  which are fed to a Deep  Convolutional Neural Network for final disease diagnosis after an initial  preprocessing.  In  61   a depth wise deep learning method was proposed to reor  ganize of COVID 19 affected lungs regions.  Roy et al.  62  investigated the application of deep learning based  model in the lung ultrasonography  LUS  images analysis of COVID 19  patients where a new deep learning technique  extracted from Spatial  Transformer Networks  that diagnoses the patient status intensity  was  put forward.  In  63   Convolutional Neural Networks  CNN  based techniques  were employed for deep feature extraction using chest X ray and CT  images. Then  these features are sent to transfer learning based  approach to diagnosis positive COVID 19 cases.  In recent years  many researchers have suggested Long Short Term  Memory  LSTM  networks for COVID 19 detection  diagnosis  classification  prediction  and forecasting. In Ref.  64   a deep  learning based LSTM method was developed for COVID 19 prediction  utilizing X ray image data. In this method  Convolutional Neural Net  works was trained to select the deep features and based on these selected  features  the deep model was trained for the final prediction of  COVID 19.  In  65   another CNN based method was proposed to detect the  COVID 19 positive cases based on X ray images. This dataset includes  X ray images of 135 COVID 19 patient and 320 from viral and bacterial  pneumonia cases. The reported result indicated that this developed  method achieved an accuracy of 89.2 .  Moreover Ahmadian et al.  66  developed a novel two phase  improved deep neuroevolution model to COVID 19 diagnosis from  chest X ray data. The deep neuroevolution algorithm developed in this  paper is tested on a real world dataset  and its performance was indi  cated by comparing different evaluation metrics.  In Table 1  a selection of the main previous machine learning models  employed for COVID 19 pandemic related tasks and their techniques   tasks  data types  accuracy and explainability are detailed. For  Explainability categorization  we distinguished High Explainability  models  e.g.  Decision Tree  Random Forest   Medium Explainability  models  e.g.  KNN  Joint Classification  and Low Explainability models   which include Deep Learning  Neural network and other similar black  box models.  In overall  we noticed that in the diagnosis of COVID 19  complex  machine learning models such as deep learning perform better than  simple models such as linear regression and decision trees. Nevertheless   the deep learning based approaches proposed in previous works were  indeed black boxes that did not explain their prediction in a manner a  human could understand  67 70 . It is therefore important to endow the  highly performing deep learning models with explainability and inter  pretability ability to accommodate the new EU data protection directive  and ensure their widespread adoption by healthcare authorities. More   over  in the next subsection previous XAI based model are reviewed.  2.2. Explainable artificial intelligence  The lack of explainability and transparency of AI based methods in  medical environments is one of their major limitations. In many  healthcare applications  it is necessary to know how the prediction  model made a specific decision  allowing the healthcare stakeholders  e.  g.  physicians  specialists  patients  researchers and public  to trust the  model. In healthcare domain  questions such as  What makes this pre  diction trustworthy   or  How did this intelligent model achieve this  result   need to be responded for specialists and physicians to entirely  embrace the application of artificial intelligence based model in assist   ing them with early diagnosis. It is crucial that every model should also  be able to provide a rationale for the diagnosis or recommendation it  made. Although some prediction techniques like decision trees are  transparent  the vast majority of artificial intelligence applications in  medicine using deep learning techniques are black box in essence and  have therefore no explanation for their prediction. This has led to the  creation of several explainable AI methods in the past few years   70 72 . Accordingly  a new research area called Explainable AI aims to  increase the explainability of black box models.  Explainable AI refers to AI and machine learning approaches that can  provide human understandable explanation for their models  behavior.  XAI is a rapidly growing research area that is aimed at providing a  justifiable  transparent  interpretable  trustable  and traceable intelli   gent model  73 .  Explainable AI model can focus on several types of explanations.  These types of explanations can be classified according to their scope   origin  and application. Depending on the scope of the explanations   they can be either global or local. While global explanations attempt to  explain the whole model at once  local explanations focus on a small  area around a specific sample. Explanations may have intrinsic origins M. Rostami and M. Oussalah                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100941 5or be post hoc. An explanation is inherent when the ML model is  transparent and can be understood due to its simple structure  for  example  Linear Regression or Decision Tree . Conversely  post hoc  explanation techniques attempt to obtain explanations from trained  models. Moreover  an explanation artificial intelligence can be model   agnostic if it applies to different learning algorithms meeting several  requirements  or it can be model specific if it is crafted for a particular  artificial intelligence model.  As opposed to previous explainable artificial intelligence models that  analyzed local and post hoc explanations  our method explains the  entire dataset  global explanation  through a single model. We propose a  global XAI model for generating predication methods that increase the  users   trust in the diagnosis. Moreover  visual representations of the  entire model provide a global explanation for the developed model. In  the next section the detail of developed explainable artificial  intelligence based model for COVID 19 disease diagnosis are described.  3.Proposed XAI based model for COVID 19 diagnosis  In this section  our explainable AI model for COVID 19 diagnosis is  developed by combining Feature Selection with Explainable Random  Forest  FSXRF . The developed FSXRF method is grouped as a model  explanation of the RF outcomes that i  calculates the nature of the dependency between different features of COVID 19 dataset  ii  ranks  the importance of each feature  iii  discards redundant features to  optimize the feature space and reduce burden complexity and  iv  vi  sualizes the various dependency in a way to ease explanation with cli  nicians by providing a decision tree like analysis.  The conceptual framework of the developed model is donated in  Fig. 2. The developed XAI COVID 19 diagnosis model focuses on  explaining the entire procedure of generating the prediction model and  the result of the developed model is provided by a combination of the  rules  numerical and visual information.  The developed FSXRF achieves both explainability and feature  optimization  which are known to enhance attractiveness in medical  diagnosis. Indeed  irrelevant and redundant features in medical dataset  have presented serious challenges to the existing artificial intelligence   based prediction model  impacting accuracy and prediction  74 77 .  Irrelevant and redundant features also increase the probability of  overfitting and increase the computational complexity  78 81 . As a  result  our model adds a feature selection phase to the main phase of  prediction for eliminating the redundant and irrelevant features.  Moreover  Fig. 3 shows the overall flow diagram of the proposed  FSXRF model. In overall  FSXRF consist of four main steps   1  Graph  representation of COVID 19 features   2  Ranking COVID 19 features    3  Identifying the final feature set and  4  Final COVID 19 diagnosis Table 1  Outlining the reviewed machine learning based models in COVID 19 pandemic related tasks.   Paper Technique Task Data type Accuracy Explainability  Mahdy et al.   46  SVM Covid 19 lung image  classification X ray image High Low  Yu et al.  47   Decision Tree Severity detection of COVID 19  paediatric cases Chest radiography and CT images Medium High  Too and  Mirjalili   48 . KNN Prediction of the death and  recovery conditions The patients   information  Gender   Age  Country  etc.  and their  symptoms Medium Medium  Song et al.   49  Time dependent model parameters. forecasting the dynamic spread  of COVID 19 Daily reported cases in China and the  United States High Low  Kumar and  Kumar  50  Fuzzy clustering and time series model Prediction of COVID 19 infected  cases and deaths Daily reported cases in India Medium Low  Cobre et al.   51  KNN  Neural Networks  Partial Least Squares  Discriminant Analysis  etc. Diagnosis and prediction of  COVID 19 severity Biochemical  hematological  and  urinary biomarkers Medium Low  Arvind et al.   52  Sliding window approach Prediction of intubation among  hospitalized patients laboratory and vitals data COVID 19  patients Medium Low  Pahar et al.   53  Residual neural networks Classification of COVID 19  cough Coughing sounds recorded during or  after the acute phase of COVID 19 Medium Low  Ebinger et al.   54  Logistic regression  SVM  KNN  etc. Prediction of duration of  hospitalization in COVID 19  patients Electronic health record data from  COVID 19 patients Medium Low  Zhang et al.   55  Least absolute shrinkage and selection operator  regression and least absolute shrinkage and selection  operator neural network models. Identification and validation of  prognostic factors in COVID 19  patients Demographic data including  clinical  data including and outcome  28 day  mortality  Medium Low  Gulati et al.   56  Linear SVC  Perceptron  Passive Aggressive  Logistic  Regression  etc. Sentiment classification of  discussion related to COVID 19  pandemic Tweets related to COVID 19  pandemic Medium Low  Singh et al.   57  Ensemble Support Vector Machine COVID 19 detection Lung tomography scan data High Low  Wu et al.  58  Joint Classification and Segmentation COVID 19 diagnosis Chest CT images Medium Medium  Yang et al.   59  Decision Tree Death outcome prediction Medical records  demographics   clinical characteristics  and  laboratory test results  Medium High  Lella and Pja   60  Deep Convolutional Neural Network Diagnosis of COVID 19 disease Human respiratory sounds such as  voice  dry cough  and breath  High Low  Qayyum et al.   61  Depth wise deep learning Detection and diagnosis of  COVID 19 infection Lungs X rays images High Low  Roy et al.  62  Spatial Transformer Networks based Deep learning Classification and Localization of  COVID 19 Markers Lung ultrasonography  LUS  images. High Low  Shamsi et al.   63  Deep transfer learning Diagnosis of COVID 19 Chest X ray and CT images High Low  Islam et al.   64  Deep Convolutional Neural Network and LSTM Detection of COVID 19 X ray images High Low  Hall et al.  65  Deep Convolutional Neural Network Detection of COVID 19 Chest x rays High Low  Ahmadian  et al.  66  Deep Neuroevolution Diagnosis of COVID 19 Chest x rays High Low  M. Rostami and M. Oussalah                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100941 6using Explainable Random Forest and considering the selected features.  The aim of the first step is to represent the features of COVID 19 diag  nosis problem as a network graph where each node corresponds to a  given feature of COVID 19 dataset  and the edges demonstrates the  feature similarities. In the next step of the FSXRF  all the original fea  tures of COVID 19 dataset are ranked by utilizing a filter based feature  weighting measure. The aim of the next step is to score different factors  of COVID 19 diagnosis by employing a feature ranking technique. In the  third step  to select non redundant and relevant features  those of high  scores and dissimilar feature are chosen using a novel feature selection  strategy  while the remaining features are removed. Finally  in fourth  step  an Explainable Random Forest based classifier is used to diagnosis  COVID 19 cases considering the selected features on the previous steps.  This developed explainable prediction model has two main phases   the feature section  i.e.  1 3 steps  and the developed explainable  random forest predication model  i.e.  4 step . In the first phase  the  features of COVID 19 data are illustrated by a graph and a set of relevant  and non redundant of initial features is selected for final diagnosis  phase  and then in the second phase  a novel approach to increase the  interpretability of the random forest based predictions is used and an  effective artificial intelligence based predictor for COVID 19 disease  diagnosis is developed using routine blood tests. In the reminder of this  section the details of these phases are described. Moreover  the  nomenclature and parameters of the developed prediction model are  provided in Table 2.  3.1. Graph presentation  To apply the proposed feature selection method  the feature of the  COVID 19 data should be shown using a weighted graph. For this aim   the initial features are illustrated with a graph FG DFCEF  where F   f1Cf2CBBBCfn is a set of initial features in which each feature corresponds  to a node in the graph  E   fiCfj BfiCfj F shows the set of edges of  the graph  and wij denotes the similarity between two features fi and fj  that are connected by the edge  fiCfj . In this paper  Pearson similarity  criteria  82  is used for the feature similarities calculation. The simi  larity between the two features fi and fj is computed as follows   Sim ij          P FVi FV i   FV j FV j                                     P FVi FV i 2                                      P  FV j FV j 2         1    where FVi and FVj denote the vectors of features fi and fj for all samples   Fig. 2.Explainable artificial intelligence approach for COVID 19 diagnosis.   Fig. 3.Flowchart of the proposed model.  M. Rostami and M. Oussalah                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100941 7respectively. Variables FVi and FVj indicate the average of vectors FVi  and FVj  over all of the COVID 19 samples  i.e. P set   respectively. If  these two features are very similar  the Pearson criterion will be close to  one  while if these two features are very dissimilar  the Pearson criterion  will be close to zero. After similarity calculation  SoftMax normalization   83  is used to scale these values into a unit interval as below    Sim ij 1 1 exp   Sim ij Sim     2    where  Sim ij is the similarity value between features fi and fj  Sim and    are the average and variance for all calculated similarities  respectively   and  Sim ij shows the normalized similarity between features fi and fj.  This similarity measure maps the feature space of a COVID 19 data  into a fully weighted and connected graph. To make the graph sparser   the edges with associated weights lower than some threshold value   are  removed.   is an adjustable parameter that takes values in the unit in  terval  0 1 . When   value is small  resp. large   more  resp. fewer  edges  will be considered in the next steps.  3.2. Feature scoring  The main goal of this step is to score the initial features of COVID 19  dataset using a filter based feature selection measure. In the proposed  model  weights are assigned to features in each cluster according to a  scoring mechanism. Therefore  removing both irrelevant and redundant  features is achieved by the proposed method. In fact  the number of the  high important and dissimilar features are selected  while the reminder  features are removed. During this step  the Fisher Score  FS  and the  Node Centrality  NC  are integrated to determine the score of each  feature. The Feature Importance  FI  of k the feature  i.e.  FI Fk is  measured as below   FI Fk  FS Fk  NC Fk  N i 1 FS Fi  NC Fi   3    where FS Fi and NC Fi denote the Fisher Score and Node Centrality of  feature Fi  respectively. Also  N shows the number of initial features. In this study  Fisher Score  FS  feature weighting measure is utilized for  feature ranking. Fisher Score is used to identify the features that are  most relevant to the target class. The Fisher Score scores feature ac  cording to their predictive and discriminatory power. Accordingly  this  criterion assigns a higher value for features with higher separation  characteristics. The Fisher Score of feature Fk is calculated as below   FS Fk    v Vnv  FVv k FV k 2   v Vnv  v FV k  2 4    where FVk is the mean value of all the samples regarding the feature fk  V  is a set of all classes in the COVID 19 dataset  i.e. positive and negative    nv is the number of samples on the class v  and   FVk and FVv k indicates  the variance and average of feature Fk on class v  respectively.  Furthermore  in our developed feature selection method  as opposed  to previous models  84 86  where only feature relevance is employed to  select final features  a subset of features with high importance and rel  evancy will be chosen. In this developed feature selection method  the  centrality of nodes is employed to calculate the influential features of the  dataset. In the analysis of social networks  identifying the more influ  ential or  central   nodes has been an important challenge  87 88 . In  many areas of social network analysis  detecting influential and more  central nodes has been used to characterize network properties. Our  model employs Laplacian Centrality  LC   88  for node centrality  calculation.  3.3. Identifying the final feature set  In most of the previous proposals for eliminating redundant features   only feature relevance has been used  but in this paper  we evaluate the  correlation between features by integrating average similarity and node  centrality. Specifically  all features are sorted according to their Feature  Importance  FI  scores. First  feature with the highest FI score is added to  the selected feature set as the first representative of original features.  Then  the next feature with the highest FI is considered as the candidate  feature  and the average similarity of this feature with the previously  selected features is calculated using the Pearson similarity criterion. If  the similarity of the candidate feature with one of the previously  selected features was greater than the value of threshold    this feature is  removed from the original feature graph FG  and the next feature with  high importance value from the initial features is considered as the next  candidate feature. This process continues until all the features have been  checked and the reminding features in the graph FG are sent to Random  Forest based COVID 19 diagnosis.  3.4. Final COVID 19 diagnosis  In this subsection the details of the fourth step of developed method  are described. A decision tree is a prediction algorithm that performs a  set of test conjunctions where each test evaluates a feature score with a  threshold value or a set of feasible values to decide whether to maintain  or discard the underlined feature. In order to divide the dataset into  disjoint subsets  test nodes are created starting from the root node. The  recursive process repeats itself until no further division is necessary.  Since each leaf corresponds to a combination of features  it is easy to  interpret local decisions. These capabilities make DT widely employed  for different applications that require a comprehension of both the  model construction and its prediction. Although decision tree based  prediction models are highly interpretable  these intelligent decision   making models have limited prediction performance due to the near  sightedness characteristic of their induction models  89 90 . When  complex interactions exist among input features  DT models usually fail  to capture these  leading to essential biases. To deal with this issue  a  decision forest  or ensemble of decision trees  is adopted in our  approach. Table 2  Nomenclature and parameters of the developed COVID 19 diagnosis model.   Symbol Description  F Feature node  FV Feature vector  FG Feature graph  E Link between original features  n Number of initial features  Sim iCj  Similarity between features fi and fj  FV i Feature Vector fi  FV i Average of feature vector FV i  P Set of dataset samples  Sim Average of all the calculated similarities    Variance of all the calculated similarities  IV fi  Importance Value of feature fi  FS fi  Fisher Score of features fi  NC fi  Node Centrality of feature fi  V Set of all classes in a dataset  i.e. Positive and Negative   nv Number of patterns on the class  FVv k Average of feature vector Fk on class v    FV k  Variance of feature vector Fk on class v  EL Laplacian Energy  fk Average value of all the samples related to the feature fk  V Set of all classes in a dataset  i.e. Positive and Negative   nv Number of samples on the class v    fk  Variance and average of feature fk on class v  fv k Average of feature fk on class v  T Decision tree    Set of rules in Decision tree  K Number of trees in decision forest  M. Rostami and M. Oussalah                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100941 8Decision Forest  DF  is a powerful ensemble learning algorithm for  integrating the results of several machine learning algorithms into a  single decision.  Several factors motivate this choice. First  the risk of trapping local  minima is reduced when several predictors are integrated. Further   when only a small amount of data is available  a single algorithm can  choose an incorrect hypothesis  which provides additional ability to  handle small size data scenarios. Finally  the combination of different  classifiers may also result in a wider search space  specifically in prob  lems where the optimal hypothesis lies away from individual models. In this work  decision forests that combine multiple decision trees  towards providing a single decision is employed for final COVID 19  diagnose.  A new technique to convert a DF into a single DT is developed in this  study. Based on the original decision forest  the resulting decision tree  approximates its prediction accuracy and provides more explainable and  faster classification. A tree decision model was chosen to be the  outputted model since it can be explained both in terms of its graphic  prediction structure as well as its separability. As compared to previous  prediction models  the developed model can be applied to all sizes of  Fig. 4.Flow pseudo code of the developed model.  M. Rostami and M. Oussalah                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100941 9forests and does not need complicated hyperparameter setting.  Suppose each datum xi  i 1ton   where n is the total number of  samples  is represented in a feature space of dimension m. Let yi be the  output indicating the class label of the datum xi. Then  given the deci  sion set D   xiCyi   xi RmCyi 1C Cc   a DT classifier is defined as  T xC CF   where F denotes the used features in tree    contains a set of  rules and x is an input sample. Moreover  a DF classifier is defined as   Tk xC kCFk Ck 1C2CBBBCK   where K corresponds to the number of trees  in the DF.  In our proposed method  the Fk are limited to neighboring nodes in  graph FG. Through this regularization  features that are functionally  related are placed on the same Decision Tree. Therefore  the generated  classifier using this tree is more trustable and explainable for physicians   and simultaneously is more generalizable. Therefore  the developed DF  is defined as  Tk xC CFG k Ck 1C2CBBBCK   where FG k is a set of features  specified using random walk on graph FG. In our proposed method  a  greedy based scenario is developed to transform a DF into an explain   able DT. For each greedy step t the performance for all k  1CBBBCK   DT  is evaluated  see Line 22 of Algorithm 1 . Here  the accuracy measure is  utilized for evaluation and if the accuracy of k th DT in iteration t is  lower than the accuracy of the DT in the prior iteration  the suggested  DT and its corresponding nodes are eliminated. On the other hand  if DT  has a higher accuracy  a random walk on a subgraph  determined using  the features in Fk t in the iteration i  is initialized. It should be noted that  the depth of this walk has now reduced by one. Finally  after updating  the DTs  a new set of K trees are sorted considering their accuracy in  order to initialize a selection procedure. These repetitions continue until  a specified number of iterations is reached.  Fig. 4 indicates the pseudo code of the developed COVID 19 diag  nosis model.  4.Experimental results  In this section  our experimental setup for COVID 19 disease diag  nosis is highlighted and the results are reported. The efficiency of the  presented model is compared with some well known prediction model  including XGBoost  91   SVM  MLP together with the state of the art  COVID 19 prediction model that aims to propose understandable  approach based on eXplainable Decision Trees  XDT   92  for COVID 19  diagnosis. The results are evaluated using a set of criteria  Accuracy   F1 score  Sensitivity  Specificity and AUROC.  To ensure a more accurate and trustworthy validation  a 10 fold  validation test is conducted. For this purpose  at each iteration  one  set is considered as a test data while other sets were considered as train  data. Then  we ran the experiment 30 times. Moreover  in all experi   ments both average and standard deviation values are recorded.  For fair experiments  different models should be evaluated on the  same training  validation and testing dataset. These experiments report  the standard deviation of the accuracy in ten independent runs together  with the average accuracy since train and test samples are randomly  separated.  In the reminder of this section  the detail of the used COVID 19 data   experimental results  sensitivity analysis  statistical analysis  and dis  cussion are explained.  4.1. Dataset  In this work  we used public COVID 19 dataset  93  to demonstrate  the effectiveness and robustness of the developed COVID 19 diagnosis  model.1 This dataset includes unknown data from patients who present  COVID 19 symptoms and requested to accomplish the SARS CoV 2 RT PCR and supplementary tests during their stay at the hospital. This  COVID 19 dataset included 5644 patients and 111 features  includes 69  Decimal features  37 String features and 5 Universally unique identifier  features  associated with blood tests  e.g. Red blood Cells  Red blood cell  distribution width  venous blood gas analysis  lymphocytes  Mean  corpuscular hemoglobin concentration  Urea  Proteina C reativa   Creatinine  Potassium  Sodium  etc.   urine  e.g. Esterase  Aspect  He  moglobin  Ketone Bodies  Density  Protein  Leukocytes  Red blood cells   Granular cylinders  etc.   and tests for the presence of other viruses  e.g.  Influenza A  Influenza B  Parainfluenza 1  etc. . During the hospital visit   RT PCR and DNA sequencing are used to diagnose Covid 19 positive  cases. The dataset demonstrates the complexity of decision making  during real healthcare problems  compared to what happens in more  theoretical experiments. As a result data sparsity is to be expected. The  dataset demonstrates the complexity of decision making during real  healthcare problems  compared to what happens in more theoretical  experiments. As a result data sparsity is to be expected.  Since this dataset contains features with missing values  to handle  these missing data in our experiments  we replaced each missing datum  with the mean of the available data on the feature set  94 .  4.2. Experimental results  In first experiments  the performance of the developed prediction  model is evaluated over COVID 19 dataset. Table 3 summarizes the  average Accuracy  F1 score  Sensitivity  Specificity and AUROC over ten  separate and autonomous runs of the different prediction model  i.e.  XGBoost  SVM  MLP and XDT . In this table  the best average values are  marked in boldface. The reported results of Table 3 show that in all cases  the developed prediction model performs better than the other COVID   19 disease diagnosis models. For example  the reported results of this  Table reveals that the average classification accuracy of the developed  approach data was 89.97   which is 1.56  higher than the average  classification accuracy for the second ranked method  i.e.  XDT .  Moreover  Table 3 shows that the developed model superior to the  second best model  i.e.  XDT model  with a difference of 1.96   4.44    1.97  and 2.19  for F1 Score  Sensitivity  Specificity and AUROC  measures  respectively. Moreover  the boxplot of 10 fold validation of  these independent runs is shown in Fig. 5.  Moreover  based on 30 independent executions  Table 4 shows the  number of times the best performance was achieved by different pre  diction models. The values of this table show that in most cases the  developed COVID 19 diagnosis model achieved the highest performance  compared to the other diagnosis models on the different measures.  Moreover  in Table 5  the normalized confusion matrices per class  are investigated. In this Table different COVID 19 diagnosis model are  compared in terms of True Negative  The actual class is Negative and  predicted class is Negative   True Positive  False Negative  False   Positive. As it can be seen from this Table  the proposed model had  the highest performance. The results of this Table show that the  Table 3  Average performance  standard deviation  shown in parenthesis  and p value of  different predications model based on 10 fold validation in 30 independent runs.   Method Accuracy F1 Score Sensitivity Specificity AUROC  XGBoost 87.71   1.34  71.45   1.42  67.52   1.38  90.82   1.26  89.36   1.24   SVM 84.79   1.31  72.48   1.71  67.01   1.36  88.96   0.67  87.69   1.31   MLP 85.25   1.29  69.92   1.37  62.21   1.03  88.17   1.43  88.38   1.36   XDT 88.41   0.59  76.17   0.67  67.21   0.82  91.02   0.69  90.62   1.03   Proposed  Model 89.97   1.08  78.13   1.21  71.65   0.76  92.99   0.82  92.81   1.06   P value 0.0034218 0.0037548 0.003295 0.004606 0.004438  1 The datasets and sourcecode are available from the corresponding author   Mehrdad Rostami  E mail  Mehrdad.Rostami oulu.fi   on reasonable request. M. Rostami and M. Oussalah                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100941 10differences between the obtained performance of the proposed predic   tion model in term of True Negative and the second best ones  XDT  and  third best ones  XGBoost  are calculated 1.61  i.e.  92.99  91.38  and  2.28  i.e.  92.99  90.71   respectively. Furthermore  based on reported  result of Table 5 and for the True Positive  The actual class is Positive  and predicted class is Positive  criterion  the developed model gained  the first rank with an average True Positive of 71.98  and the XDT and  XGBoost prediction model were ranked second and third with an  average True Positive of 68.81 and 65.57  respectively. Moreover  in  terms of False Negative and False Positive  respectively. Given that  these two criteria are calculated based on false predictions  the lowness  of this criterion indicates the superiority of that method. The reported  results show that in both criteria  the developed prediction model was  more accurate than the other COVID 19 diagnosis models.  Moreover  Fig. 6 displays the average ROC curve acquired by the  developed model. Based on changing the decision threshold  the curve is  calculated for both 1 Specificity  False Positive Rate  and sensitivity   True Positive Rate . With a model that is close to 1  its discrimination  capability is greater in the prediction test. These reported results indi  cated that  with a sensitivity of 0.826 and specificity of 0.802  the ROC  curve had a maximum average sensitivity and specificity.  As explained earlier  one of the main parts of the proposed method is  feature selection phase  which prevents the selection of redundant and  irrelevant features. Typically  a large portion of this COVID 19 data is  irrelevant or redundant  decreasing the predictability of the model.  Therefore  the performance of the prediction model is significantly  influenced by feature selection. In this study  an efficient feature selec  tion method has been proposed utilizing the feature similarity and node centrality techniques. This mechanism identifies a subset of dissimilar  features that have the highest correlation with the target class of dis  eases. In this developed feature selection model  in feature selection  phase  21 features are selected  and the reminder features are elimi   nated. These features are listed in Table 6.  It should be noted that the features of this listed are sorted based on  their importance values  FIs . Moreover  in these selected features the  features of PLT  EOS  MPV  CRP  AST  CREAT  WBC  MONO  LYM and  AST obtained the highest importance value compared to others features.  Moreover in Fig. 7 part of the final extracted tree for explainable  COVID 19 diagnosis is shown. Considering this route in the derived  decision tree  the features of PLT  MPV  EOS  WBC  LYM  ALT and HGB  can be used for final COVID 19 disease diagnosis. Based on these  extracted features and generated rules  Decision Tree explanation is as  follows   if  PLT  0.10  and  MPV F 1.02  and  EOS   0.66  and  WBC    0.52  and  LYM F 1.11  and  ALT F 0.51  and  HGB F0.96  then  the COVID 19 diagnosis is positive.  4.3. Comparison with other feature selection methods  In this subsection  the performance of the proposed feature selection  method is evaluated. The performance of the developed feature selection  method is compared with four well known feature selection methods  including Fisher Score  FS   86   Laplacian Score  95    Fig. 5.Boxplot of 10 fold validation in 30 independent runs.   Table 4  Number of times the best results are achieved by different prediction models in  30 independent runs.   Method Accuracy F1 Score Sensitivity Specificity AUROC  XGBoost 2 1 1 2 2  SVM 0 1 0 0 1  MLP 1 0 1 1 0  XDT 2 1 1 1 2  Proposed Model 25 27 27 26 25   Table 5  Normalized confusion matrices for different COVID 19 diagnosis model.   Method True   Negative True   Positive False   Negative False   Positive  XGBoost 92.18 66.87 8.71 34.71  SVM 89.79 67.36 11.27 37.21  MLP 90.71 65.57 10.01 38.37  XDT 91.38 69.81 9.75 32.56  Proposed  Model 92.99 71.98 8.12 30.72   Fig. 6.The ROC Curve for the developed model.   Table 6  The selected features sorted based on their  importance.   Number Feature  1 PLT  2 EOS  3 MPV  4 CRP  5 AST  6 CREAT  7 WBC  8 MONO  9 LYM  10 RBC  11 NEU  12 NA  13 ALT  14 HCT  15 HGB  16 RWD  17 UREA  18 K  19 MCV  20 MCH  21 MCHC  M. Rostami and M. Oussalah                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100941 11Relevance Redundancy Feature Selection  RRFS   96  and Minimal    Redundancy  Maximal Relevance  MRMR  as well as four  state of the art feature selection methods including Five way Joint  Mutual Information  FJMI   97   Adaptive Hypergraph Embedded Dic  tionary Learning  AHEDL   98   Artificial Bee Colony Algorithm based  on Dominance  ABCD   99  and Multi objective PSO  MPSO   79   methods. In this experiment  in the feature selection phase  the method proposed in each paper is used and for a fair comparison  in classifica   tion phase  for all of them  a common classifier is used.  Fig. 8 shows the average classification accuracy of different feature  selection methods on various classifiers in 30 independent runs. The  reported results of this figure indicated that the performance of the  developed model is higher than those from all other feature selection  models. As an example  on SVM classifier  the classification accuracy of  FS  LS  RRFS  MRMR  FJMI  AHEDL  ABCD and MPSO feature selection  methods are 75.17   73.19   83.81   84.93   86.17   85.19    86.71  and 88.09   respectively. However  the classification accuracy  of proposed feature selection method yields 89.96  accuracy.  In the next experiment  different feature selection methods are  compared in term of execution times. In these experiments  corre   sponding execution times  in ms  for each feature selection method are  shown in Fig. 9. Due to the fact that the feature selection phase and the  final prediction phase are separate  only the execution time for feature  selection phase is calculated in this figure. It can be seen from the  recorded data that generally the single variate feature selection ap  proaches  FS and LS  are much faster than the multivariate feature se  lection approaches  i.e.  RRFS  MRMR  FJMI  AHEDL  ABCD  MPSO and  proposed method . This is because univariate methods do not consider  the possible dependency between features in feature selection  there   fore  they are computationally less costly than multivariate approaches.  It should be noted that compared to multivariate feature selection ap  proaches  univariate ones are less accurate since they ignore feature  dependencies  as demonstrated in Fig. 8. Moreover  the reported results  Fig. 7.Part of explainable tree for COVID 19 diagnosis.   Fig. 8.Average classification accuracy of different feature selection methods on various classifiers.   Fig. 9.Average execution time  in ms  of different feature selection approaches  over 30 independent runs. M. Rostami and M. Oussalah                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100941 12revealed that the between the state of the art feature selection ap  proaches  the proposed feature selection has the lowest average execu   tion time.  4.4. Comparison with other explainable RF based models  RFs integrate multiple DTs towards providing a single output in su  pervised prediction duties. RFs have gained popularity among data  scientists due to their ability to combine different hypotheses into a  single model and their effectiveness in dealing with any type of rela  tional dataset. Every prediction model that is made by a RF must go over  a wide variety of trees. Consequently  the end user does not have a clear  understanding of the model  s predictions. Additionally  the model  structure is practically made up of numerous single models  which  makes it difficult for the end user to comprehend. Several researchers   developed models to transform a RF into a single DT. In this subsection   the performance of the proposed method for transforming a RF to a  single DT is compared with four state of the art methods. The details of  these methods are explained in Table 7. In this experiment  in the feature  selection phase  for a fair comparison a common feature selection  method  the proposed method in this paper  is used. and in trans   formation phase  transform a RF to a single DT   the method proposed in  each paper is employed. Table 8 reports the average performance of  different transforming techniques on in 30 independent runs. The re  ported results of this table indicated that the performance of proposed  transforming technique is higher than those from all other transforming  techniques. As an example  the classification accuracy of Counterfactual  Sets  100   Rule Conjunctions  90   Construction and Filtering of  Conjunction Sets  89  and Explainable Matrix  Visualization  101   methods are 87.81   84.79   85.12   and 88.19   respectively.  However  the classification accuracy of proposed transforming tech  nique yields 89.53 .  4.5. Sensitivity analysis of the parameters  The developed COVID 19 prediction model has two parameters   and     where their corresponding optimum values must be justified by the  user.  The   value is a threshold for edge removing of initial generated  graph of feature space value. This threshold is employed to make the  graph sparser. If   parameter is set to a low value  fewer edges will be  removed  and a denser graph emerges for subsequent steps. Similarly   when   is set to a high value  more edges will be removed  and a sparser  graph is resulted or the next steps. The   value is a threshold for average  similarity value that governs the final feature selection process. This  parameter can be set to any value in the range  01 . If this parameter is  set to a high value  the number of features and the portability risk of  selection of similar features will be increased. Moreover  when   is set to  a low value  the number of features will be reduced. It is therefore  important to identify appropriate value of these parameters in a way to  maximize the prediction accuracy.  To investigate the optimal value for these parameter  different ex  periments were performed to examine how the performance impacts the  parameter selection.  Fig. 10 exhibits the   parameter sensitivity analysis for Accuracy  F1   Score  Sensitivity and Specificity measures. The results showed that in  most cases when the   is adjusted to 0.6  the developed COVID 19 diagnosis model yields the best performance.  Likewise  Fig. 11 shows the   parameter sensitivity analysis for Ac  curacy  F1 Score  Sensitivity and Specificity measures. The results  indicated that in most cases when the   is adjusted to 0.7  the proposed  COVID 19 diagnosis model achieves the best performance.  4.6. Statistical analysis of the proposed method  In this subsection  the Friedman test  102  is employed to perform  the statistical analysis of the experimental results. The Friedman test is a  non parametric statistical test introduced by Milton Friedman to detect  differences between multiple treatments  as is the case with parametric  measures. By ranking each row together and then evaluating the values  of the ranks based on columns  the ranking procedure is completed. For  this purpose  each COVID 19 prediction model is ranked for each mea  sure. We used SPSS statistics to run this statistical test. Based on reported  Table 7  Characteristics of comparative transforming techniques.   Paper Year Technique  Rub en et al.  100  2020 Counterfactual Sets  Sagi et al.  90  2020 Rule Conjunctions  Sagi et al.  89  2021 Filtering of Conjunction Sets  Neto et al.  101  2021 Explainable Matrix  Visualization  Table 8  Average performance and standard deviation  shown in parenthesis  of trans   forming techniques.   Method Accuracy F1 Score Sensitivity Specificity  Counterfactual Sets 87.81   1.24  72.32   2.31  68.51   2.41  91.86   1.93   Rule Conjunctions 84.79   2.31  75.31   1.72  69.51   3.31  88.82   3.12   Filtering of  Conjunction Sets 85.12   3.27  69.17   3.12  51.15   1.28  89.13   2.84   Matrix  Visualization 88.19   2.51  76.13   2.13  68.21   2.81  91.54   1.71   Proposed Method 89.53   1.12  78.21   1.32  71.38   2.69  92.79   1.76   p value 0.0034784 0.0037691 0.0039877 0.004897   Fig. 10.Average performance  in    over 30 independent runs  with different    values for Accuracy  F1 Score  Sensitivity and Specificity measures.  Fig. 11.Average performance  in    over 30 independent runs  with different    values for Accuracy  F1 Score  Sensitivity and Specificity measures. M. Rostami and M. Oussalah                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100941 13results of Table 3  the average ranking for different prediction models  i.  e.  XGBoost  SVM  MLP  XDT and Proposed Model  on each measure is  indicated in Table 9. These results indicate that the proposed model has  the best performance. Moreover  Table 10 shows the results of Friedman  test for these compared COVID 19 diagnosis models. The reported re  sults demonstrated that the p value of 0.0034218  0.0037548   0.003295  0.004606 and 0.004438 on Accuracy  F1 Score  Sensitivity  and Specificity and AUROC measures  correspondingly. Considering  these values are lower than 0.05  a conclusion can be drawn of the  statistical significance of the outperformance of our model with respect  to alternative models shown in the table. Moreover  based on the result  of Table 8  the p value for Accuracy  F1 Score  Sensitivity and Specificity  measures were 0.0034784  0.0037691  0.0039877 and 0.004897. These  reported values demonstrated that  in terms of statistical significance   our model outperforms other transforming techniques  i.e.  Counter   factual Sets  Rule Conjunctions  Filtering of Conjunction Sets and  Matrix Visualization .  5.Discussion  In this paper  an available dataset of routine blood tests is used   which includes positive COVID 19 cases as well as negative COVID 19  cases. Our machine learning based method is trained and evaluated  for COVID 19 disease diagnosis. The average Accuracy  F1 Score   Sensitivity  Specificity and AUROC of our model were 89.98    78.12   71.69   92.96  and 92.88   respectively  which is higher  than other classical and state of the art COVID 19 disease diagnosis   Tables 3 and 4 .  Moreover  in terms of the average normalized confusion matrix  the  developed method was compared with other methods  and the reported  results showed that in all cases  the developed COVID 19 diagnosis  model had better performance  Table 5 .  Furthermore  the performance of the proposed feature selection  method in terms of accuracy and execution time is compared with four  well known feature selection methods as well as four state of the art  feature selection methods. The reported results indicated that the ac  curacy of the developed method is higher than other feature selection  methods. Moreover  in terms of execution time the reported results  revealed that  the univariate feature selection methods  i.e. FS and LS   have less execution time than multivariate methods due to the fewer  calculations they perform in their selection process. That is because in  univariate feature selection approaches  the possible similarity between  features is not considered in the feature selection process. Therefore   these methods have low accuracy in real applications and high   dimensional datasets. On the other hand compared to state of the art  feature selection approaches  the reported results revealed that  the  proposed feature selection method has the lowest average execution  time  Figs. 8 and 9 .  The reported results of feature selection phase indicated that  PLT   EOS  MPV  CRP  AST  CREAT  WBC  MONO  LYM and RBC were the ten  most important features  respectively  Table 6 . This finding demon   strates the importance of AST  WBC  CRP  RBC and MONO features in  COVID 19 diagnosis  that is in line with the results of other previous  studies  7 92 . Based on these reported results  it can be said that the developed  prediction method in this study is one of the most accurate and fastest  models presented to date. Our proposed model is an intelligent model  that can help physicians to diagnose COVID 19 positive cases. Through  our understandable prediction and feature selection phase  it is possible  to determine which features of datasets were more important in pre  diction. This explainable COVID 19 disease diagnosis model has higher  transparency and explainability than previous black box methods   67 70 103 105  that can improve the acceptance rate and trustworthy  of intelligent model for physicians.  In the reminder of this section the reasons for the enhanced perfor   mances of the developed COVID 19 prediction model compared to other  prediction methods are discussed. These are grounded on a key inno  vation that are incorporated into the developed  which made the model  perform better than many state of the art methods    1 Unlike many previous methods of COVID 19 diagnosis  which use  PCR and imaging approaches  i.e.  Chest X ray  and Chest CT  and  have drawbacks such as costly equipment  need to specialist staff   and certified labs  our developed model make use of routinely  available blood test results  which is much faster  accessible   cheaper  and affordable than previous methods.   2 This paper proposes an artificial intelligence decision system to  provide physicians with a simple and human interpretable set of  rules for diagnosing COVID 19 positive cases in the same spirit as  Decision Tree model together with social graph visualization to  ensure transparency and explainability for any clinician.   3 In many previous COVID 19 prediction models  the final prediction  is made by a single classifier  which means that their generalization  ability is limited. Contrary to these previous models  a model based  on Ensemble Learning is developed in this study. As a result of the  ensemble decision forest model  the prediction accuracy is improved   and also the probability of overfitting is reduced.   4 Irrelevant features  as well as redundant features  strongly affect the  performance of learning model and the result of COVID 19 diagnosis.  Therefore  an intelligent prediction model should recognize and  remove irrelevant and redundant features as far as possible. All of the  initial features have been used by many previous methods of diag  nosing COVID 19. Therefore  the accuracy and generalizability of  these methods will be reduced  as well as their computational  complexity will be increased. In our proposed model  by incorpo   rating an additional feature selection phase  a new COVID 19 diag  nosis model is developed which will enhance the final model s  performance.   5 Though decision forest has a high level of prediction performance  its  inherent limitations cannot be hidden as well. This can be summa   rized in two factors. First  because the decision forest generates many  trees instead of one  the classification of decision forest is usually  inefficient and in real time prediction systems  this property creates a  significant vulnerability. Second  a DF must explore a variety of trees  when it makes a classification. Therefore  the end user cannot clearly  justify the model s predictions and they cannot understand the  model structure as it is composed of numerous single models. As a  result  standard decision forests are usually prone to limitation when  a straightforward and real time explanations are required in the Table 9  Average ranks of the different COVID 19 prediction models on different  measures.   Measure Compared COVID 19 diagnosis models  XGBoost SVM MLP XDT Proposed Model  Accuracy 4.79 4.06 2.68 2.10 1.34  F1 Score 4.79 3.93 2.79 2.17 1.31  Sensitivity 4.68 3.89 2.82 2.31 1.27  Specificity 4.62 4.06 2.72 2.20 1.37  AUROC 4.58 4.03 2.79 2.27 1.32  Table 10  The results of the Friedman statistics test.    Measure   Accuracy F1 Score Sensitivity Specificity AUROC  Chi Square 10.3858 13.9218 10.2319 15.0436 15.0321  df 4 4 4 4 4  Asymp.Sig   p value  0.0034218 0.0037548 0.003295 0.004606 0.004438  M. Rostami and M. Oussalah                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100941 14health system application. However  when real time is not an  important aspect  such a limitation can be ignored.  6.Conclusion and future works  A severe respiratory disease called COVID 19 has been reported by  the WHO. Since the beginning of the pandemic until 1st March 2022   more than 5.9 million people have died as a result of the COVID 19.  Recently  artificial intelligence has emerged as a breakthrough of cur  rent strategy  and it can be utilized to diagnose COVID 19 positive cases   detect  and predict their mortality. A complex machine learning model  like deep learning performs better than simple algorithms for COVID 19  diagnosis. Although deep learning models perform well  their decisions  cannot be justified by explanations  which may limit their effectiveness  in medical applications.  To overcome this limitation  explainable AI proposes developing a  suite of machine learning models that have a high level of accuracy and  are easily explained by physicians. The proposed method includes two  main phases. In the first phase  a set of relevant and non redundant  feature are selected for final prediction. In this developed feature se  lection mechanism  the feature relevance is calculated using the node  centrality and Fisher Score  whereas the redundancy of features is  calculated using feature similarities. Then  in the second phase  after  selecting the final features  in the fourth step  the Decision Forests based  classifier is employed to COVID 19 prediction by employing routine  blood tests. In contrast to previous deep learning based COVID 19  diagnosis models  which are difficult to explain for physicians due to  their black box nature  the developed prediction model is transparent  through its explainable decision trees. Moreover  by employing an  ensemble learning based prediction model  a new COVID 19 diagnosis  model is developed that will improve the final prediction accuracy. The  proposed method has been compared to the well known and newest  COVID 19 diagnosis models including XGBoost  SVM  MLP and  eXplainable Decision Trees model with respect to four different perfor   mance metrics  Classification Accuracy  F1 Score  Sensitivity and  Specificity. The experimental results indicate that the developed pre  diction model achieved outperformed the state of the art methods and  baseline algorithms.  The developed model opens the door for the use of explainable AI in  healthcare applications. Inherent limitations have also been examined  and thoroughly discussed. In future works  we will attempt to extend out  proposal model beyond the inherent limitations of DF algorithm by  endowing a set of rule based approach that each the integration of  various DT in DF mechanism to ensure further transparency.  Declaration of competing interest  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial  interestsor personal relationships that could have appeared to influence  the work reported in this paper.  Acknowledgment  This research is connected to the DigiHealth project  a strategic  profiling project at the University of Oulu. The project is supported by  the Academy of Finland  project number 326291  and the University of  Oulu Academy of Finland Profi5 on Digihealth.  References   1 Barnawi A  et al. Artificial intelligence enabled Internet of Things based system  for COVID 19 screening using aerial thermal imaging. Future Generat Comput  Syst 2021 124 119 32.   2 Viviani M  et al. Assessing vulnerability to psychological distress during the  COVID 19 pandemic through the analysis of microblogging content. Future  Generat Comput Syst 2021 125 446 59.  3 Puxeddu MG  Petti M  Astolfi L. A comprehensive analysis of multilayer  community detection algorithms for application to EEG based brain networks.  Front Syst Neurosci 2021 15.   4 Saberi Movahed F  et al. Decoding clinical biomarker space of covid 19  exploring  matrix factorization based feature selection methods. 2021.   5 Li Z  et al. Development and clinical application of a rapid IgM IgG combined  antibody test for SARS CoV 2 infection diagnosis. J Med Virol 2020 92 9    1518 24.   6 Brinati D  et al. Detection of COVID 19 infection from routine blood exams with  machine learning  a feasibility study. J Med Syst 2020 44 8  1 12.   7 Babaei Rikan S  et al. COVID 19 diagnosis from routine blood tests using artificial  intelligence techniques. Biomedical Signal Processing and Control  2021  103263.   8 Alsharif W  Qurashi A. Effectiveness of COVID 19 diagnosis and management  tools  a review. Radiography 2021 27 2  682 7.   9 Kalane P  et al. Automatic detection of COVID 19 disease using U Net  architecture based fully convolutional network. Biomed Signal Process Control  2021 67 102518.   10  Nasiri E  et al. A novel link prediction algorithm for protein protein interaction  networks by attributed graph embedding. Comput Biol Med 2021 137 104772.   11  Vantaggiato E  et al. Covid 19 recognition using ensemble cnns in two new chest  x ray databases. Sensors 2021 21 5  1742.   12  Turkoglu M. COVIDetectioNet  COVID 19 diagnosis system based on X ray images  using features selected from pre learned deep features ensemble. Appl Intell  2021 51 3  1213 26.   13  Berrimi M  et al. COVID 19 detection from Xray and CT scans using transfer  learning. In  2021 international conference of women in data science at taif  university  WiDSTaif . IEEE  2021.   14  Sun L  et al. Adaptive feature selection guided deep forest for covid 19  classification with chest ct. IEEE J Biochem Health Informat 2020 24 10    2798 805.   15  Shaban WM  et al. A new COVID 19 Patients Detection Strategy  CPDS  based on  hybrid feature selection and enhanced KNN classifier. Knowl Base Syst 2020 205   106270.   16  Ji T  et al. Detection of COVID 19  a review of the current literature and future  perspectives. Biosens Bioelectron 2020 166 112455.   17  Tian S  et al. Pulmonary pathology of early phase 2019 novel coronavirus   COVID 19  pneumonia in two patients with lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol 2020 15   5  700 4.   18  Ferrari D  et al. Routine blood tests as a potential diagnostic tool for COVID 19.  Clin Chem Lab Med 2020 58 7  1095 9.   19  Sharma MK  et al. Mediative fuzzy logic mathematical model  a contradictory  management prediction in COVID 19 pandemic. Appl Soft Comput 2021 105   107285.   20  Alharthi AM  Lee MH  Algamal ZY. Gene selection and classification of  microarray gene expression data based on a new adaptive L1 norm elastic net  penalty. Inform Med Unlocked 2021 24 100622.   21  Wang W  et al. Gene selection for cancer detection using graph signal processing.  Inform Med Unlocked 2021 25 100662.   22  Vaishya R  et al. Artificial Intelligence  AI  applications for COVID 19 pandemic.  Diabetes Metabol Syndr  Clin Res Rev 2020 14 4  337 9.   23  Swapnarekha H  et al. Role of intelligent computing in COVID 19 prognosis  a  state of the art review. Chaos  Solit Fractals 2020 138 109947.   24  Oussalah MAI. Explainability. A bridge between machine vision and natural  language processing. In  International conference on pattern recognition.  Springer  2021.   25  Huerta EB  Duval B  Hao J K. Fuzzy logic for elimination of redundant  information of microarray data. Dev Reprod Biol 2008 6 2  61 73.   26  Cao C  et al. Deep learning and its applications in biomedicine. Dev Reprod Biol  2018 16 1  17 32.   27  Sharma A  Rani R. C HMOSHSSA  gene selection for cancer classification using  multi objective meta heuristic and machine learning methods. Comput Methods  Progr Biomed 2019 178 219 35.   28  Wang Y  Sun M  Liu L. Basketball shooting angle calculation and analysis by  deeply learned vision model. Future Generation Computer Systems  2021.   29  Deng L  Li J  Han Z. Online defect detection and automatic grading of carrots  using computer vision combined with deep learning methods. Lebensm Wiss  Technol 2021 149 111832.   30  Dokuz Y  Tufekci Z. Mini batch sample selection strategies for deep learning  based speech recognition. Appl Acoust 2021 171 107573.   31  Ma J  et al. Deep dual side learning ensemble model for Parkinson speech  recognition. Biomed Signal Process Control 2021 69 102849.   32  Idowu OP  et al. An integrated deep learning model for motor intention  recognition of multi class EEG Signals in upper limb amputees. Comput Methods  Progr Biomed 2021 206 106121.   33  Gabeff V  et al. Interpreting deep learning models for epileptic seizure detection  on EEG signals. Artif Intell Med 2021 117 102084.   34  Shamshirband S  et al. A review on deep learning approaches in healthcare  systems  taxonomies  challenges  and open issues. J Biomed Inf 2020 103627.   35  Goodman B  Flaxman S. European Union regulations on algorithmic decision   making and a  right to explanation . AI Mag 2017 38 3  50 7.   36  Barredo Arrieta A  et al. Explainable Artificial Intelligence  XAI   concepts   taxonomies  opportunities and challenges toward responsible AI. Inf Fusion 2020   58 82 115.   37  Adadi A  Berrada M. Peeking inside the black box  a survey on explainable  artificial intelligence  XAI . IEEE Access 2018 6 52138 60.   38  Molnar C. Interpretable machine learning. Lulu. com  2020. M. Rostami and M. Oussalah                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100941 15 39  Anusha M  Sathiaseelan JGR. Feature selection using K means genetic algorithm  for multi objective optimization. Procedia Comput Sci 2015 57 1074  80.   40  Marcelloni F. Feature selection based on a modified fuzzy C means algorithm  with supervision. Inf Sci 2003 151 201  26.   41  Moradi P  Rostami M. Integration of graph clustering with ant colony  optimization for feature selection. Knowl Base Syst 2015 84 144  61.   42  Gonz  alez J  et al. A new multi objective wrapper method for feature selection    accuracy and stability analysis for BCI. Neurocomputing 2019 333 407  18.   43  Xue Bing  Zhang Mengjie  Browne WN. Particle swarm optimization for feature  selection in classification  a multi objective approach. IEEE Trans Cybern 2013 43   6  1656  71.   44  Jalali SMJ  et al. An oppositional Cauchy based GSK evolutionary algorithm with  a novel deep ensemble reinforcement learning strategy for COVID 19 diagnosis.  Appl Soft Comput 2021 111 107675 .   45  Khan M  et al. Applications of artificial intelligence in COVID 19 pandemic  a  comprehensive review. Expert Syst Appl 2021 185 115695 .   46  Mahdy LN  et al. Automatic x ray covid 19 lung image classification system based  on multi level thresholding and support vector machine. MedRxiv  2020. p. 2020.  03. 30.20047787 .   47  Yu H  et al. Data driven discovery of a clinical route for severity detection of  COVID 19 paediatric cases. IET Cybersyst Robot 2020 2 4  205  6.   48  Too J  Mirjalili S. A hyper learning binary dragonfly algorithm for feature  selection  a COVID 19 case study. Knowl Base Syst 2021 212 106553 .   49  Song J  et al. Maximum likelihood based extended Kalman filter for COVID 19  prediction. Chaos  Solit Fractals 2021 146 110922 .   50  Kumar N  Kumar H. A novel hybrid fuzzy time series model for prediction of  COVID 19 infected cases and deaths in India. ISA  Instrum Soc Am  Trans 2021 In  Press  Corrected Proof. https   doi.org 10.1016 j.isatra.2021.07.003 .   51  Cobre AdF  et al. Diagnosis and prediction of COVID 19 severity  can biochemical  tests and machine learning be used as prognostic indicators  Comput Biol Med  2021 134 104531 .   52  Arvind V  et al. Development of a machine learning algorithm to predict  intubation among hospitalized patients with COVID 19. J Crit Care 2021 62   25 30.   53  Pahar M  et al. COVID 19 cough classification using machine learning and global  smartphone recordings. Comput Biol Med 2021 135 104572 .   54  Ebinger J  et al. A machine learning algorithm predicts duration of hospitalization  in COVID 19 patients. Intel Based Med 2021 5 100035 .   55  Zhang S  et al. Identification and validation of prognostic factors in patients with  COVID 19  a retrospective study based on artificial intelligence algorithms.  J Intensive Med 2021 1 103  9. https   doi.org 10.1016 j.jointm.2021.04.001 .   56  Gulati K  et al. Comparative analysis of machine learning based classification  models using sentiment classification of tweets related to COVID 19 pandemic.  Mater Today Proc 2021 51 38  41.   57  Singh M  et al. Transfer learning  based ensemble support vector machine model  for automated COVID 19 detection using lung computerized tomography scan  data. Med Biol Eng Comput 2021 59 4  825  39.   58  Wu YH  et al. JCS  an explainable COVID 19 diagnosis system by Joint  classification and segmentation. IEEE Trans Image Process 2021 30 3113  26.   59  Yang Q  et al. Clinical characteristics and a decision tree model to predict death  outcome in severe COVID 19 patients. BMC Infect Dis 2021 21 1  783 .   60  Lella KK  Pja A. Automatic diagnosis of COVID 19 disease using deep  convolutional neural network with multi feature channel from respiratory sound  data  cough  voice  and breath. Alex Eng J 2021 61 1319  34.   61  Qayyum A  et al. Depth wise dense neural network for automatic COVID19  infection detection and diagnosis. Ann Oper Res 2021 302 1  21.   62  Roy S  et al. Deep learning for classification and localization of COVID 19 markers  in point of care lung ultrasound. IEEE Trans Med Imag 2020 39 8  2676  87.   63  Shamsi A  et al. An uncertainty aware transfer learning based framework for  COVID 19 diagnosis. IEEE Transact Neural Networks Learn Syst 2021 32 4    1408  17.   64  Islam MZ  Islam MM  Asraf A. A combined deep CNN LSTM network for the  detection of novel coronavirus  COVID 19  using X ray images. Inform Med  Unlocked 2020 20 100412 .   65  Hall LO  et al. Finding covid 19 from chest x rays using deep learning on a small  dataset. 2020. arXiv preprint arXiv 2004.02060 .   66  Ahmadian S  et al. A novel deep neuroevolution based image classification  method to diagnose coronavirus disease  COVID 19 . Comput Biol Med 2021 139   104994 .   67  Jo Y Y  et al. Detection and classification of arrhythmia using an explainable deep  learning model. J Electrocardiol 2021 67 124  32.   68  Peng J  et al. An explainable artificial intelligence framework for the  deterioration risk prediction of hepatitis patients. J Med Syst 2021 45 5  61 .   69  Valente F  et al. A new approach for interpretability and reliability in clinical risk  prediction  acute coronary syndrome scenario. Artif Intell Med 2021 117 102113 .   70  Neves I  et al. Interpretable heartbeat classification using local model agnostic  explanations on ECGs. Comput Biol Med 2021 133 104393 .   71  Hu Y  et al. Understanding risk factors for postoperative mortality in neonates  based on explainable machine learning technology. J Pediatr Surg 2021 56 12    2165  71.   72  Jiang H  et al. Learning efficient  explainable and discriminative representations  for pulmonary nodules classification. Pattern Recogn 2021 113 107825 .  73  Shin D. The effects of explainability and causability on perception  trust  and  acceptance  implications for explainable AI. Int J Hum Comput Stud 2021 146   102551 .   74  Moradi P  Rostami M. A graph theoretic approach for unsupervised feature  selection. Eng Appl Artif Intell 2015 44 33  45.   75  Rostami M  Berahmand K  Forouzandeh S. A novel method of constrained feature  selection by the measurement of pairwise constraints uncertainty. J Big Data  2020 7 1  83 .   76  Rostami M  Berahmand K  Forouzandeh S. A novel community detection based  genetic algorithm for feature selection. J Big Data 2021 8 1  2 .   77  Mokhtia M  Eftekhari M  Saberi Movahed F. Feature selection based on  regularization of sparsity based regression models by hesitant fuzzy correlation.  Appl Soft Comput 2020 91 106255 .   78  Rostami M  et al. Review of swarm intelligence based feature selection methods.  Eng Appl Artif Intell 2021 100 104210 .   79  Rostami M  et al. Integration of multi objective PSO based feature selection and  node centrality for medical datasets. Genomics 2020 112 6  4370  84.   80  Rostami M  M P. A clustering based genetic algorithm for feature selection.  Information and Knowledge Technology  IKT   2014. p. 112 6.   81  Mokhtia M  Eftekhari M  Saberi Movahed F. Dual manifold regularized regression  models for feature selection based on hesitant fuzzy correlation. Knowl Base Syst  2021 229 107308 .   82  MonirulKabir Md  Shahjahan Md  Murase K. A new local search based hybrid  genetic algorithm for feature selection. Neurocomputing 2011 74 17  2914  28.   83  Theodoridis S  Koutroumbas K. Pattern recognition. Oxford.  Academic Press   2008 .   84  Yeo GFA  Aksakalli V. A stochastic approximation approach to simultaneous  feature weighting and selection for nearest neighbour learners. Expert Syst Appl  2021 185 115671 .   85  Zhu R  Dornaika F  Ruichek Y. Joint graph based embedding and feature  weighting for image classification. Pattern Recogn 2019 93 458  69.   86  Gu Quanquan  Li Zhenhui  Han J. Generalized Fisher score for feature selection.  In  Proceedings of the international conference on uncertainty in artificial  intelligence  2011 .   87  Yan Xiangbin  Li Zhaia  Fan W. C index  a weighted network node centrality  measure for collaboration competence. J Informat 2013 7 1  223  39.   88  Qi Xingqin  et al. Laplacian centrality  a new centrality measure for weighted  networks  vol. 194. Information Sciences  2012. p. 240 53.   89  Sagi O  Rokach L. Approximating XGBoost with an interpretable decision tree. Inf  Sci 2021 572 522  42.   90  Sagi O  Rokach L. Explainable decision forest  transforming a decision forest into  an interpretable tree. Inf Fusion 2020 61 124  38.   91  Chen T  Guestrin C. XGBoost  a scalable tree boosting system. In  Proceedings of  the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and  data mining. San Francisco  California  USA  Association for Computing  Machinery  2016. p. 785 94.   92  Alves MA  et al. Explaining machine learning based diagnosis of COVID 19 from  routine blood tests with decision trees and criteria graphs. Comput Biol Med  2021 132 104335 .   93  Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein. Diagnosis of covid 19 and its clinical spectrum    ai and data science supporting clinical decisions  From 28th Mar to 3st Apr    https   www.kaggle.com einsteindata4u covid19 .  Accessed 20 July 2021 .   94  Rostami M  et al. Gene selection for microarray data classification via multi   objective graph theoretic based method. Artif Intell Med 2022 123 102228 .   95  He Xiaofei  Deng Cai  Niyogi1 P. Laplacian score for feature selection. Adv Neural  Inf Process Syst 2005 18 507  14.   96  Ferreira Artur J  Figueiredo MAT. An unsupervised approach to feature  discretization and selection. Pattern Recogn 2012 45 9  3048  60.   97  Tang X  Dai Y  Xiang Y. Feature selection based on feature interactions with  application to text categorization. Expert Syst Appl 2019 120 207  16.   98  Zheng X  et al. Gene selection for microarray data classification via adaptive  hypergraph embedded dictionary learning. Gene 2019 706 188  200.   99  Coleto Alcudia V  Vega Rodr guez MA. Artificial Bee Colony algorithm based on  Dominance  ABCD  for a hybrid gene selection method. Knowl Base Syst 2020   205 106323 .   100  Fern andez RR  et al. Random forest explainability using counterfactual sets. Inf  Fusion 2020 63 196  207.   101  Neto MP  Paulovich FV. Explainable matrix   visualization for global and local  interpretability of random forest classification ensembles. IEEE Trans Visual  Comput Graph 2021 27 2  1427  37.   102  Friedman M. A comparison of alternative tests of significance for the problem of  m rankings. Ann Math Stat 1940 11 1  86  92.   103  Kukar M  et al. COVID 19 diagnosis by routine blood tests using machine  learning. Sci Rep 2021 11 1  1  9.   104  Plante TB  et al. Development and external validation of a machine learning tool  to rule out COVID 19 among adults in the emergency department using routine  blood tests  a large  multicenter  real world study. J Med Internet Res 2020 22   12  e24048 .   105  Alakus TB  Turkoglu I. Comparison of deep learning approaches to predict  COVID 19 infection. Chaos  Solit Fractals 2020 140 110120 . M. Rostami and M. Oussalah                                                                                                                                                                                                                

