Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100943 Available online 14 April 2022 2352 9148   2022 The Author s . Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY NC ND license   http   creativecommons.org licenses by  nc nd 4.0   .Acceptance of telemedicine technology among physicians  A  systematic review  Ali Garavanda  Nasim Aslania  Hamed Nadrib c    Saeideh Abedinid  Shirin Dehghand  aDepartment of Health Information Technology  School of Allied Medical Sciences  Lorestan University of Medical Sciences  Khorramabad  Iran  bDepartment of Health Information Technology  School of Allied Medical Sciences  Urmia University of Medical Sciences  Urmia  Iran  cStudent Research Committee  Urmia University of Medical Sciences  Urmia  Iran  dDepartment of Health Information Technology and Management  School of Allied Medical Sciences  Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences  Tehran  Iran    ARTICLE INFO   Keywords   Telemedicine  Technology acceptance models  Physician  Telehealth ABSTRACTS   Background  Telemedicine is vital technology to deliver health services at a distance by health professionals   especially physicians  who are key players in Community health. Given the important role of telemedicine in  improving health care  especially in the COVID 19 epidemic  an examination of behavioral barriers and not using  this technology among physicians can be important.  Objectives  The aim of our systematic review is to identify the behavioral factors influencing the acceptance of  telemedicine technology among physicians in different contexts.  Methods  A literature search was conducted according to the PRISMA guidelines. The search was conducted  without any time limitations up to the Dec of 2020 in Web of Science  PubMed  Scopus  and Embase scientific  databases  by applying keywords. The article selection was made based on inclusion  telemedicine among  physicians  using the acceptance behavioral theories   and exclusion  physicians not the end users of technology   it is not about acceptance of technology  criteria by two authors independently. Data was gathered using a data  extraction form  and the results were reported in tables and figures based on the study objectives.  Results  From all the retrieved studies  37 articles were included based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria. The  United States and Spain have the most conducted studies about the acceptance of telemedicine from the phy  sicians   point of view. The study results showed that the Technology Acceptance Model  TAM  and extended  TAM model have the highest frequency. The main factors affecting the acceptance and use of telemedicine were  perceived usefulness  attitude to use  compatibility  perceived ease of use  self efficacy  subjective norms   perceived behavioral control  and facilitating condition.  Conclusions  Identifying the most important factors that affect the acceptance of telemedicine from physicians    perspectives  as a key player in telemedicine projects  can help managers and policymakers make the right de  cisions about implementation of telemedicine successfully  especially in the initial phases. Future studies can also  evaluate the aggregation of factors identified in this paper.    1.Introduction  Telemedicine technology provides healthcare services in situations  where distance is a determinant factor. Specialized staff use telecom   munications technologies to exchange valid information for the diag  nosis  treatment  and prevention of disease and injury  as well as for  continuing education concerning health of the needy  1 3 . This tech  nology includes a complete set of proceedings taken to increase the  health and well being of the individual in society  and has a variety of  applications and a wide range of technologies  2 . Broadly  there are three main types of telemedicine  store and forward  remote moni   toring  and real time interactive services  4 .  Some distinguish telemedicine from telehealth  which was previ   ously restricted to service delivery by physicians only and the telehealth  representing services provided by health professionals in general   including nurses  pharmacists  and others. However  both of them are  synonymous and used interchangeably in this manuscript. Telemedicine  combines the convenience  low cost  and ready accessibility of health   related information and communication using the Internet and associ   ated technologies. The use of telemedicine can help patients to become   Corresponding author. Department of Health Information Technology  Urmia University of Medical Sciences  Nazloo Campus  Sero Road  Urmia  Iran  E mail address  Hamednadri4 gmail.com  H. Nadri .   Contents lists available at ScienceDirect  Informatics in Medicine Unlocked  u   zkw  s yo kr o     1ow  o to 1m y2w m k o2ty   https   doi.org 10.1016 j.imu.2022.100943  Received 16 January 2022  Received in revised form 1 April 2022  Accepted 2 April 2022   

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100943 2more involved in their healthcare plan and increase their autonomy.  Telemedicine can significantly contribute to healthcare in underserved  areas through telestroke  telecardiology  teledermatology  tele  pediatrics  telepsychiatry  and teleneonatology. This tool aims to  improve access to care for anyone regardless of location and it reduce  the number of face to face visits  5 6 .  With of the COVID 19 and quarantine days  pandemic  this issue has  become very important. The distance and social distance that are  important aspects of telemedicine can be an important reason to offer a  unique opportunity to accelerate acceptance and the many advantages  of this technology  which is anyway unavoidable. So  telemedicine can  be utilized in three the health care aspect  including prevention  edu  cation  and treatment.  Studies have shown that effective communication between patient  and physician is associated with positive health outcomes  7 9 . A  growing body of research shows that physicians  communication be  haviors does indeed have a positive impact on patients  health out  comes. Accordingly  physicians are providing medical care remotely  using telemedicine and virtual services. These virtual care services  provide various non dispensing functions  enabling physicians for  delivering quality medical care during the COVID 19 pandemic. Such  services may include review of patient medication histories  health ed  ucation  health therapy management  and drug use review remotely   10 .  The technology acceptance process is critical to the effective imple   mentation of the process  and one of the key measures to the successful  implementation of IT and continued use is technology acceptance by  users. The high cost of implementation and poor reimbursements pol  icies for care delivered through telemedicine can result in resistance to  change for adoption of digital innovations among physicians. A major  barrier is the lack of acceptance by the key players  physicians  in  healthcare  11 12 . This barrier is related to both technical and  behavioral aspects  13 . In the technical  contextual  aspect of this  non acceptance  are factors such as buying a suitable technology   training staffs and even the patients  workflow after telemedicine  such  as referral to the laboratory after a visit   uncertainty of financial sta  bility after quarantine  confusion in coverage insurance and inadequate  technology infrastructure  14 15 . Non acceptance behavioral aspects  of physicians are the subject of our study. Implementing digital health  technologies is complex but can be facilitated by considering the fea  tures of the tool that is being implemented  and the team that will use it   also and the routines that will be affected  16 . Licensing issue is a  significant barrier because countries and states within countries need to  licensing requirements  17 . Non technical factors  human character   istics  computer skills  and organizational characteristics  are the most  influential factors in adopting care technologies  13 . Many models are  provided and used to determine the influential factors in accepting and  using technologies  especially health. Some of these models include the  Technology Acceptance Model  TAM   Extended technology acceptance  model  TAM2   Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology   UTAUT   Theory of Planned Behavior  TPB   and Diffusion of In  novations Theory  DIT   13 18 21 . Due to the importance of studying  the factors affecting the acceptance of telemedicine as one of the most  widely used information technologies in health  many studies have  determined the factors affecting its acceptance using the mentioned  models. Due to the variety of models and behavioral  individual  factors   in each country  technology and context  many studies have been con  ducted with different models of acceptance of telemedicine among  physicians  which each one of them introduces specific factors and  models. The results of these studies are scattered and often duplicate  across different literatures  in other words  in duplicate environments   various acceptance models and factors have been confirmed without  knowledge of the studies performed  or even sometimes in similar types  of telemedicine  the same factors and models are repeated exactly.  Therefore  this study can show a coherent whole of the models and  factors studied in different types of telemedicine among physicians and gain an overview of the studies and factors.  Considering that so far no study has comprehensively assessed the  models and factors affecting the acceptance of telemedicine from the  perspective of physicians as key users of the system. The purpose of our  study is to provide a total overview and theory of behavioral models and  factors performed in different types of telemedicine technology  and  general acceptance model based on the frequency of approved factors in  different types of telemedicine is to examine the admission factors  among physicians in different environments.  2.Methods  2.1. Study design  This study is a systematic review conducted ending until 2020 based  on Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta Analyses   PRISMA   22 .  2.2. Study selection process  We used systematic search processes to identify all original published  articles related to physicians  acceptance and perception of telemedicine  in health services from the beginning to the end of 2020. The authors   title  journal  year of publication  and abstract for each article were  collected in an Excel  Microsoft Office 2019  spreadsheet. The PubMed   Scopus  Web of Science  ScienceDirect  and Embase databases were  searched  and English only publications were selected. The broad key  words used for the initial search are displayed in Table 1.  2.3. Inclusion and exclusion criteria  Original research articles related to the acceptance and use of tele  medicine from the perspective of physicians were included in the study  without time limit. Articles that used technology acceptance theories  were given priority.  The exclusion criteria had physicians not the end users of technol   ogy  it is not about acceptance of technology  in general  the only  evaluation is the use of telemedicine. Review articles  letters to the ed  itor  short communications and other irrelevant articles were excluded  from the study.  The full texts of the remaining articles were read for eligibility  and  the qualified publications were retained in a list. A search of the recent  reviews and hand searching references from articles were made to get  related articles.  The quality assessment of the selected articles was done based on  Newcastle Ottawa Scale  NOS  tool  23 . This assessment tool is used to  assess the quality of observational studies in systematic reviews  24 .  However  evaluations revealed that all selected articles were of the  quality required for inclusion in the study.  2.4. Data gathering  After selecting related studies  data gathering was conducted by two  authors independently. We used a data extraction table in Excel soft  ware. The main items of the table include general data of the studies   Table 1  Search strategy.   limitations English full text studies  up to Dec 2020   1  telemedicine  OR  telehealth  OR  telemonitoring  OR  telecare    2  acceptance  OR  behavioral intention  OR  intention to use  OR   adoption  OR  technology acceptance models  OR  effective  factors    3  Physicians  OR  doctor  OR  healthcare providers  OR  HCP   Search  strategy  1 AND  2 AND  3  A. Garavand et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100943 3model name  type of applied telemedicine  and most influential factors  in acceptance of telemedicine.  2.5. Data analyses  Data analyses were done through content analyses  and the results  were summarized and reported in tables and figures based on the study  objectives.  3.Results  A total of 4789 documents were retrieved from the database  searches. After the removal of 1023 duplicates  3766 publications were  entered into the selection process. Results of the screening process in the  analysis are noted in the flow diagram in Fig. 1. First  3766 publications    titles and abstracts were assessed together by three authors. At this  stage  3523 articles  that means most of them unrelated to the topic   were excluded from the review. The full texts of the relevant articles  were then reviewed by three authors together. Three authors then  reviewed the titles and abstracts of the relevant articles. When the title  or abstract was deemed significant for inclusion in the review  the full  text was scanned to ensure relevant content. At this stage  206 articles  unrelated to acceptance of telemedicine technology in physicians   related to the effectiveness of technology  satisfaction with telemedicine  technology  or evaluating telemedicine use were excluded in general.  When there was disagreement  the authors evaluated their assessment  until consensus was reached. The systematic search of the literature  identified 37 articles that reported original empirical research on the use  of telemedicine among physicians  details of these articles are shown in  Table 2.  According to our findings  the first study on the adoption of telemedicine technology among physicians using the Theory of Planned  Behavior  TPB  model was in 1999 in Hong Kong. As shown in Table 3   approximately half of the studies on telemedicine acceptance used the  original TAM model  and several other papers combined the TAM and  extended TAM or TAM2 models. Other important models used after the  TAM model are the TPB and DIT models and combinations of these  models. Other surviving common models performed among physicians  include UTAUT  TIB  NPT  and so on.  The distribution of countries in relation to the acceptance of tele  medicine technology among physicians is shown in Table 4. The United  States has the highest number of telemedicine studies. Spain is next with  five studies  followed by Hong Kong with four studies. China  Germany   South Korea  Canada  and India are next with 3 3  2  2  and 2 studies   respectively.  As shown in Table 5  the results showed that 22 of the studies were  generally conducted on the acceptance of telemedicine services without  mentioning the context of telemedicine  platform   and perceived use  fulness  10   attitude  6   compatibility  5   perceived ease of use  4    self efficacy  4   subjective norm  4   and perceived behavioral control   3  factors had the most important and highest frequency of use among  the studies  respectively. The next telemedicine platform is tele  consulting  with four studies that accepted factors shown in the table.  Mobile health and telerehabilitation are other types of telemedicine that  have been ranked with three studies  and the perceived usefulness factor  is the most important accepted factor in this type of telemedicine. Other  telemedicine substrates include telehomecare  telemedicine in diabetes   telemonitoring  teleneonatology  telestroke and tele palliative each with  one study. The most important factor of these platforms is the perceived  usefulness that has been accepted in all these studies.  The frequency of models and factors obtained in telemedicine  acceptance among physicians shows that telemedicine services  in  Fig. 1.Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews  PRISMA  flow diagram.  A. Garavand et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100943 4Table 2  Publications related to the acceptance of telemedicine among physicians.   Item Author Year Country Basic model Technology studied   Platform The factor affecting the  acceptance Other  1 Hu PJ   Chau  PY  29  1999 Hong Kong Theory of Planned  Behavior  TPB  Telemedicine Attitude  perceived behavioral  control The subjective norm factor was  ineffective.  2 HU et al.  30  1999 Hong Kong TAM  Technology  acceptance model  Telemedicine Perceived usefulness    3 Chau  P. Y. K    Hu  P. J. H  31  2001 Hong Kong TAM  TPB Telemedicine Attitude  perceived usefulness   compatibility Subjective norm and perceived  behavioral control factors were  ineffective  4 C P Y.K. Chau  P.  J. H. Hu HAU  AND HU  32  2002 Hong Kong TAM  TPB Telemedicine Perceived usefulness  perceived  behavioral control Subjective norm  perceived ease  of use  and attitude were  ineffective.  5 Gagnon et al.   33  2003 Canada Theory of  interpersonal  behavior  TIB  Telemedicine Normative factor  comprising  personal  social norms  self   identity   6 Helitzer et al.   34  2003 USA Diffusion of  Innovations Theory   DIT  Telemedicine Relative advantage   compatibility  complexity   observability  trialability    7 Spaulding et al.   35  2005 USA Diffusion of  Innovations Theory   DIT  Health care consultation Adopters   perceptions of the  patient advantages  provider  advantages  observability   trialability    8 J. Kim et al.  36  2010 USA TAM and TPB Telehomecare Attitude  subjective norms   perceived ease of use  Perceived  usefulness. Theory of planned behaviour  better explains physicians    actual use of telemedicine.  9 Bennani Az et al.   37  2010 Morocco TAM Telemedicine Attitude  Perceived usefulness.    10 Kifle et al.  38  2010 Ethiopia TAM  TPB  UTAUT Telemedicine Self efficacy  compatibility   perceived ease of use  perceived  usefulness  social influence   anxiety The Perceived voluntariness has  a negative impact  11 Gagnon  M. P  et al.  39  2011 Spain TAM Telemonitoring Perceived usefulness  facilitators    12 Parra et al.  40  2012 Spain TAM TeleStroke Perceived usefulness and  perceived ease  Subjective norm   facilitating conditions  intention  to use    13 Rho MJ  Choi IY   Lee J  41  2014 South Korea TAM Telemedicine Perceived usefulness  perceived  ease of use  the accessibility of  medical records and of patients   self efficacy  perceived  incentives    14 Saig  Rubi  o  et al.  42  2014 Spain   Colombia   Bolivia Extended TAM Telemedicine Level of ICT use in personal life   perceived Ease of use   Propensity to innovate    15 Zailani.S et al.   43  2014 Malaysia Extended TAM Telemedicine Government policies  top  management support  perceived  usefulness  computer self   efficiency  health culture Moderating role of health  culture on the relationship  between government policies as  well as perceived usefulness on  telemedicine acceptance by  Malaysian hospitals  16 Dany  F    R omer  B  11  2014 Germany TAM Telemedicine Physicians   technological  contexts  data security and data  reliability   financial contexts   billability and costs   individual  contexts  technology affinity   subjective norms and  motivations   and organizational  contexts  compatibility of  telemedicine systems with  existing processes     17 Kuang Ming Kuo  et al.  44  2015 Taiwan Theory of Planned  Behavior TPB  Telemedicine Attitude  AT   subjective norm   SN   perceived behavioral  control  PBC  According to the results  our  study suggests that differing  strategies for experienced and  inexperienced physicians must  be formulated to substantially  boost the adoption of  telemedicine technology.  18 Saigi Rubi  o F  et al.  45  2016 Spain Extended TAM Telemedicine Security  confidentiality   reduced cost  the patients    predisposition Patients and medical staffs can  influence acceptance through  the factor of subjective norm.  19 Adenuga K I  et al.  46  2017 Nigeria UTAUT Telemedicine Performance expectancy  effort  expectancy  facilitating  condition  reinforcement factor    20 2018 India TAM Telemedicine     continued on next page  A. Garavand et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100943 5general  have a proven model based on the TAM model including  perceived usefulness  attitude  compatibility  perceived ease of use  self   efficacy  subjective norm  perceived behavioral control  facilitating  condition  health culture  reduced cost  security  and government pol  icies factors. The relationships of this model can be implicitly created in  the form of Fig. 2 by basing the TAM model implicitly. 4.Discussions  Most organizational and technical  contextual  factors  such as  connection speed  equipment  substrates  etc.  affect the intention of  physicians to use telemedicine technology and is predictable. Never   theless  most behavioral factors are unpredictable and vary in different  end users such as physicians  patients  and professionals. Behavioral  beliefs play a central role in health research  25 . So behavioral  indi  vidual  factors are critical in the acceptance of telemedicine by Table 2  continued    Item Author Year Country Basic model Technology studied   Platform The factor affecting the  acceptance Other  Shadangi et al.   47  Perceived usefulness  perceived  ease of use  attitude  21 Pereyra   Rodriguez et al.   48  2018 Spain Extended TAM Telemedicine Institution s support  perceived  usefulness Introduction of article is in  English  22 Ayatollahi et al.   49  2018 Iran TAM Telemedicine in diabetes Perceived usefulness  perceived  ease of use  personal abilities   availability of resources   subjective norms    23 G. H. Mengesha  and M. J.  Garfield  50  2019 Ethiopia UTAUT Telemedicine Facilitating conditions   compatibility with medical  practice  compatibility with  physicians preferred work style    24 Shadangi et al.   51  2019 India Theory of Planned  Behavioral  TPB  Telemedicine Attitude  social norms  perceived  behavioural control and  perceived value    25 Almojaibel et al.   52  2019 Saudi Arabia   USA TAM Tele Pulmonary Perceived usefulness  perceived  ease of use  behavioral intention    26 Asiedu et al.   53  2019 USA Normalization  process theory   NPT  Teleneonatology perceived benefit  mutual  understanding of the guidelines   and expectations of use.    27 Jacob et al.  54  2020 Switzerland  and Germany Researcher made Clinical photo  documentation mHealth  app Awareness  attitude  culture   experience and habit  usefulness   easy to use No acceptance model  28 Almojaibelet al   55  2020 USA TAM Telerehabilitation for  pulmonary rehabilitation. Perceived usefulness Sample studies are from several  countries  29 Klingb et al.  56  2020 Dar Es  Salaam   Tanzania TAM M health technology for  emergency care of burn  patients Compatibility  Perceived  usefulness Most of the factors used in the  study  such as image  sound   perceived ease of use  Self   efficacy  Voluntariness  Anxiety   Social influences  Facilitating  conditions were not effective.  30 Lucia et al.  57  2020 USA  Brazil Researcher made Telemedicine Policy  culture  privacy Security was not effective.  31 Nguy et al.  58  2020 Canada TAM Telehealth applications in  palliative care perceived usefulness enabling  remote connection and  information sharing platform   and ease of use  integration with  existing IT systems and user   friendly with ready access to  technical support  User friendliness has been the  most important acceptance  factor  32 Haun eta l  59  2020 Germany Diffusion of  Innovations Theory   DIT  Video based integrated  care models featuring  mental health specialist  video consultations   MHSVC  the availability of a designated  room    33 Kissi et al.  60  2020 China TAM Telemedicine Perceived ease of use  perceived  usefulness These factors led to increased  efficiency  quality of services   quality patient care delivery   and satisfaction among  physicians  34 Cao et al.  61  2020 China Elaboration  likelihood model  and Trust transfer  theory The promotion of mobile  online health community   MOHC  Doctor s initial trust  doctor s  information quality  trust in  offline doctors  health service   service quality  MOHC  platform s initial trust.    35 Lee et al.  62  2020 South Korea TAM Teleconsultation Robots Perceived usefulness  perceived  ease of use  satisfaction    36 Almojaibel et al.   63  2020 USA TAM Telerehabilitation Perceived usefulness Other factors were not  influential  37 Chen et al.  64  2020 china Expectancy theory  and the Bagozzi   Dholakia  and  Basuroy  BDB  Online Counseling Services Extrinsic rewards  expected  relationships  image  sense of  self worth    A. Garavand et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100943 6physicians. This study aims to review the studies conducted in related to  the adoption of this technology in terms of behavioral factors.  Most studies have used the term telemedicine and services without  mentioning their type and context. Given that there are different types of  telemedicine  they seem to be general and ambiguous studies. Each  specific type of telemedicine has its own patients  and certain factors  that may influence its use. For example  telecounseling is very different  from telesurgery  it requires different tools and even certain health  professionals  and these differences can change the influencing factors.  Considering that in these studies  most of the same factors and  acceptance models have been used  but the influencing factors have  significant contradictions  such as subjective norm and perceived easy   to use factors. Their base model has been TAM and extended TAM  models. This may lead to lack of physician understanding of telemedi   cine  So  according to the different types of telemedicine  a specific type  of telemedicine should be considered  and the general services of tele  medicine  which is ambiguous  should not be considered. According to  the results  what is obvious and accepted in most studies is the TAM  model  which has been accepted in most cases  so the TAM model is the  most important basic model in accepting telemedicine among  physicians.  AlQudah et al.  20  Conducted a review study to examine the  acceptance of technology  models  and factors common in the health  care environment. The key findings confirmed that the TAM  UTAUT   and their constructs  anxiety  computer self efficacy  innovativeness   and trust  are robust theories to understand the acceptance of various  technologies through different users. The results of this study are  consistent with our study of the acceptance of telemedicine among  physicians.  The model presented in the results section is in fact a proposal model  that is based on the frequency of confirmed factors. There may be  important and new factors in studies that are not very common but are  very important. Each type of telemedicine can have specific factors that  can be combined with the proposed model.  One of the factors that has been used in most studies and has not been  accepted is the subjective norm. Garavnd et al.  21  showed that in technologies that have a private aspect  the subjective norm is ineffec   tive. Therefore  the use and strengthening of this factor among physi   cians should be done with caution.  In a comprehensive systematic review study on the use of the Table 3  Frequency of acceptance models as a basis for telemedicine acceptance among  physicians.   Model used Frequency  Technology acceptance model  TAM  15  Extended technology acceptance model  TAM2  4  Theory of Planned Behavior  TPB  3  Diffusion of Innovations Theory  DIT  3  Combination of TAM and TPB 3  Unified theory of acceptance and use of technology  UTAUT  2  Theory of interpersonal behavior  TIB  1  Normalization process theory  NPT  1  Expectancy theory and the Bagozzi  Dholakia  and Basuroy  BDB  1  Elaboration likelihood model and Trust transfer theory 1  Combination of TAM  TPB and UTAUT 1   Table 4  The distribution of countries in relation to the acceptance of  telemedicine.   Country Number of studies  United states  USA  8  Spain 5  Hong Kong 4  China 3  Germany 3  South Korea 2  India 2  Canada 2  The remaining of the countries have a study each  Table 5  Types of telemedicine and frequency of factors accepted in them.   Context of Telemedicine Frequency of  telemedicine type Factors and frequency  Telemedicine services 21 Perceived usefulness  10   attitude   6   compatibility  5   perceived  ease of use  4   self efficacy  4    subjective norm 4   perceived  behavioral control  3   facilitating  condition  2   health culture  2    reduced cost  2   security  2    government policies  2    comprising personal  1   relative  advantage  1   anxiety  1   level of  ICT use in personal life  1    propensity to innovate  1   top  management support  1    reliability  1   technology affinity   1   motivations  1   the patients   predisposition  1   performance  expectancy  1   effort expectancy   1   reinforcement factor  1    institution s support  1   privacy   1   confidentiality  1   billability   1   the accessibility of medical  records and of patients  1    perceived incentives  1    complexity  1   observability  1    trialability  1 .  Tele consultation 4 Perceived usefulness  1    perceived ease of use  1    satisfaction  1   trialability  1    image  1   observability  1    adopters  perceptions of the  patient advantages  1   provider  advantages  1   the availability of  a designated room  1   extrinsic  rewards  1   expected  relationships 1   sense of self   worth  1 .  Mobile health 3 Perceived usefulness  2    awareness  1   attitude  1   culture   1   experience  1   habit  1    perceived easy to use  1   doctor s  initial trust  1   doctor s  information quality  1   trust in  offline doctors  health service  1    service quality  1   application  platform s initial trust  1    compatibility  1 .  Telerehabilitation   Telepulmonary  3 Perceived usefulness  3    perceived ease of use  1    behavioral intention  1 .  Telehomecare 1 Perceived usefulness  2    perceived ease of use  2   attitude   1   subjective norms  1 .  Telemedicine in  diabetes 1 Perceived usefulness  1    perceived ease of use  1   personal  abilities  1   availability of  resources  1   subjective norms   1 .  Telemonitoring 1 Perceived usefulness  1    facilitators  1 .  Teleneonatology 1 Perceived benefit  1   mutual  understanding of the guidelines   1   expectations of use  1 .  TeleStroke 1 Perceived usefulness  1    perceived ease of use  1    Subjective norm  1   facilitating  conditions  1   intention to use  1 .  Telehealth applications  in palliative care 1 perceived usefulness  1    perceived ease of use  1 .  A. Garavand et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100943 7technology acceptance model  TAM  conducted by Rahimi et al.  in  2018  19   the results showed that most of the factors that affect the  acceptance of telemedicine by physicians are almost consistent with our  study. In our study  new factors are observed that  despite their low  frequency in the study  seem to be very important and should be given  much attention in telemedicine acceptance studies with the COVID 19  pandemic  such as government policies  relative advantage  top man  agement support  patient  s and doctor  s initial trust the patients   pre  disposition  and trialability.  The results of our study are consistent with those of Bradford et al.   26 . This review study aims to collate  review and synthesize the  available literature regarding telehealth services in rural and remote  locations of Australia  and to identify the factors associated with their  sustained success. Six key factors related to service success and sus  tainability included vision  ownership  compatibility  economy  effi  ciency  and equipment.  In reviewing the articles  the role of physicians in the use of tele  medicine has been emphasized more  and fewer models and factors have  emphasized the importance of educating patients as one of the  communication aspects of telemedicine. However  according to Meh  rotra et al.  14  one of the serious barriers to the use of telemedicine  among doctors is the time consuming training of patients to use this  technology. Also  the results of the study of Ashfaq et al.  27  showed  that poverty and lack of education was thought to be the biggest barrier  to the practice of telemedicine in the developing world.  Another major barriers to using telemedicine are socioeconomic and  cultural factors  28 . Additionally  telemedicine is mostly implemented  in rural and under populated areas  and cultural and religious beliefs are  important in these areas  therefore they generally prefer practitioners  who are familiar with their culture  15 . In studies  especially tele  counseling  few studies have paid attention to the category of culture  and religious beliefs. Therefore  cultural factors in the acceptance of  telemedicine can be helpful.  The availability of a designated room factor  while simple  is an  important factor in telecounseling that can play a significant role in the  organization and acceptance of this type of telemedicine among the  medical profession.  With the spread of the COVID 19 due to the rapid spread of the  disease and its unknowingness  in remote areas where the information  infrastructure is not appropriate  and the nature of the distance in  telemedicine  factor access to update scientific information  and tele   consulting is even more important.  The number of studies in countries has shown that most of these  studies have taken place in high income countries  and only a few numbers of these factors are tested in the low income countries. So   according to the authors  along with financial issues  defined standards  at the national level can affect greatly on the use of telemedicine  15 .  The use of telemedicine in low income countries can reduce many  medical costs  thus  the results of this study for developing countries can  be very helpful for accepting telemedicine among physicians.  A limitation in the choice of telemedicine studies is that mobile  software may be considered as a telemedicine technology  but due to the  widespread use of mobile and the variety of applications  it is a separate  technology  so studies were selected from the articles that used the  keyword telemedicine. One of the limitations of some of the studies was  that the review factors were performed on all health professionals. To  overcome this limitation  factors that only affecting physicians were  reported.  5.Conclusion  Telemedicine is still a rich field for more innovation and investment   and it will bring more opportunities as a new technology that improves  the quality of telemedicine services in the coming years. Telemedicine  technology and its different types are important and necessary tech  nologies in facilitating prevention and treatment  especially during the  pandemic of COVID 19 for medical staff and patients  and we are real  izing its importance day by day. Physicians are playing the crucial role in  public health  so their use of telemedicine can help in reducing cost   accelerating actions  preventing the spread of COVID 19 to the society   and consequently  in the world. The use of this technology among  physicians is considered as a key function  however  if it is not identified  and enhanced  that can lead to fail of the technology. The use of Tele  medicine is not exclusive to the COVID 19 pandemic period  and this  technology can be used at any time. There is a concern that the use of  this technology will be deminished after the COVID 19 pandemic due to  the lack of government support  insurance coverage  financial resources  and voluntary use.  When reviewing studies in the use of telemedicine among physicians   and the type of technology used  validated models and factors in each  context have been extracted. TAM and TAM2 models offer a number of  obtained factors such as perceived usefulness  attitude  compatibility   perceived ease of use  self efficacy  subjective norm  perceived behav   ioral control  facilitating condition  health culture  reduced cost  secu  rity  and government policies which can be utilized as a behavioral and  individual model  in addition to contextual factors  to examine the  acceptance of telemedicine among doctors.  Many studies have been conducted to examine the acceptance of this  Fig. 2.The most important factors affecting the acceptance of telemedicine from the perspective of physicians.  A. Garavand et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100943 8technology and its types among physicians. According to the authors  a  comprehensive investigation was needed to implement these studies   and review the factors. Despite some of the factors that are generally  accepted in all types of telemedicine technologies  some of them are  specific. In this systematic review  we have tried to identify the most  important factors which are affect the acceptance of telemedicine from  the physician perspective as a key player in telemedicine projects. These  results can assist managers and policymakers in making acceptable de  cisions to implement telemedicine successfully  in particular  in the  initial phases. However  in order to achieve more accurate results  it is  suggested that the model presented in our study  which is as the result of  combining the most important factors that can affect acceptance of  telemedicine from physicians   perspective  be further examined and  evaluated.  Protection of human and animal subjects  Not applicable.  Funding  None.  Contributions  A.G and N.A Searched for articles on the databases and retrieved  many articles. H.N and A.G decided on the inclusion criteria and  reviewed the retrieved articles based on the target checklists. H.N wrote  the manuscript and draw the figures and construct the tables. S.A and S.  D reassessed the selected articles  reviewed the manuscript  and edited  the figures and tables. All authors read and approved the final  manuscript.  Declaration of competing interest  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial  interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence  the work reported in this paper.  Acknowledgments  We thank all the authors for their good cooperation.  References   1 Organization WH. Global strategy on digital health 2020 2025. 2021 .   2 Manyazewal T  Woldeamanuel Y  Blumberg HM  Fekadu A  Marconi VC. The  potential use of digital health technologies in the African context  a systematic  review of evidence from Ethiopia. NPJ digital medicine 2021 4 1  1  13.   3 Hyder MA  Razzak J. Telemedicine in the United States  an introduction for  students and residents. J Med Internet Res 2020 22 11  e20839 .   4 Nakajima I  Sawada Y  Maeda T  Martin DL  Nagano S  Hamano N. Telemedicine  using small satellite MEO HICAT for international medical communications. In   Hsiao F B  editor. COSPAR colloquia series  10. Pergamon  1999. p. 258 67.   5 Alvandi M. Telemedicine and its role in revolutionizing healthcare delivery. Am. J.  Accountable Care 2017 5 1  e1  5.   6 Andrews V. Using telemedicine in clinical decision making. Pract Nurs 2014 25 1    42 6.   7 Arora NK. Interacting with cancer patients  the significance of physicians    communication behavior. Soc Sci Med 2003 57 5  791  806.   8 Stewart MA. Effective physician patient communication and health outcomes  a  review. CMAJ  Can Med Assoc J   Can Med Assoc J 1995 152 9  1423 .   9 Akbar A  Iqbal A  Gaziano D  Gasior F  Zaidi AJ  Iqbal A  et al. A cross sectional  survey on telemedicine use for doctor patient communication. Cureus 2020 12 9  .   10  Bokolo Anthony J. Use of telemedicine and virtual care for remote treatment in  response to COVID 19 pandemic. J Med Syst 2020 44 7  132 .   11  Dany F  R omer B. Understanding Dr. NO a comprehensive model explaining  PHYSICIANS   acceptance of telemedical systems. 2014 .   12  Health care reform  duties and responsibilities of the stakeholders. Saint Joseph  s  University  2011. Available from  https   sites.sju.edu icb health care reform duti  es and responsibilities of the stakeholders  .  13  Nadri H  Rahimi B  Lotfnezhad Afshar H  Samadbeik M  Garavand A. Factors  affecting acceptance of hospital information systems based on extended technology  acceptance model  a case study in three paraclinical departments. Appl Clin Inf  2018 9 2  238  47.   14  Mehrotra Ateev  David Linetsky  Hatch Hilary. This is supposed to be  telemedicine  s time to shine. Why are doctors abandoning it  Stat 2020. Submitted  for publication  https   www.statnews.com 2020 06 25 telemedicine time to shi  ne doctors abandoning it  .  Accessed 25 June 2020 .   15  Ly BA  Labont  e R  Bourgeault IL  Niang MN. The individual and contextual  determinants of the use of telemedicine  a descriptive study of the perceptions of  Senegal  s physicians and telemedicine projects managers. PLoS One 2017 12 7    e0181070 e .   16  van Lieshout F  Yang R  Stamenova V  Agarwal P  Palma DC  Sidhu A  et al.  Evaluating the implementation of a remote monitoring program for Chronic  Obstructive Pulmonary Disease  qualitative methods from a service design  perspective. J Med Internet Res 2020 22 10  e18148 .   17  Garg S  Gangadharan N  Bhatnagar N  Singh M  Raina S  Galwankar S.  Telemedicine  embracing virtual care during COVID 19 pandemic. J Fam Med Prim  Care 2020 9 9  4516 .   18  Garavand A  Mohseni M  Asadi H  Etemadi M  Moradi Joo M  Moosavi A. Factors  influencing the adoption of health information technologies  a systematic review.  Electron Physician 2016 8 8  2713 .   19  Rahimi B  Nadri H  Lotfnezhad Afshar H  Timpka T. A systematic review of the  technology acceptance model in health informatics. Appl Clin Inf 2018 9 3    604 34.   20  AlQudah AA  Al Emran M  Shaalan K. Technology acceptance in healthcare  a  systematic review. Appl Sci 2021 11 22  10537 .   21  Garavand A  Samadbeik M  Nadri H  Rahimi B  Asadi H. Effective factors in  adoption of mobile health applications between medical sciences students using  the UTAUT model. Methods Inf Med 2019 58 4 5  131  9.   22  Page MJ  Moher D  Bossuyt PM  Boutron I  Hoffmann TC  Mulrow CD  et al.  PRISMA 2020 explanation and elaboration  updated guidance and exemplars for  reporting systematic reviews. BMJ 2021 372 n160 .   23  Lo CK L  Mertz D  Loeb M. Newcastle Ottawa Scale  comparing reviewers   to  authors   assessments. BMC Med Res Methodol 2014 14 1  45 .   24  Wells G  Shea B  O Connell D  Peterson J  Welch V  Losos M  et al. Newcastle   Ottawa quality assessment scale cohort studies. University of Ottawa  2014 .   25  Shortliffe EH  Shortliffe EH  Cimino JJ  Cimino JJ. Biomedical informatics   computer applications in health care and biomedicine. Springer  2014 .   26  Bradford NK  Caffery LJ  Smith AC. Telehealth services in rural and remote  Australia  a systematic review of models of care and factors influencing success and  sustainability. Rural Rem Health 2016 16 4  4268 .   27  Ashfaq A  Memon SF  Zehra A  Barry S  Jawed H  Akhtar M  et al. Knowledge and  attitude regarding telemedicine among doctors in karachi. Cureus 2020 12 2    e6927 e .   28  Jang Jaccard J  Nepal S  Alem L  Li J. Barriers for delivering telehealth in rural  Australia  a review based on Australian trials and studies. Telemed J e Health 2014   20 5  496  504.   29  Hu PJ  Chau PY. Physician acceptance of telemedicine technology  an empirical  investigation. Top Health Inf Manag 1999 19 4  20  35.   30  Hu PJ  Chau PYK  Sheng ORL  Tam KY. Examining the technology acceptance  model using physician acceptance of telemedicine technology. J Manag Inf Syst  1999 16 2  91  112.   31  Chau PYK  Hu PJ H. Information technology acceptance by individual  professionals  a model comparison approach. Decis Sci J 2001 32 4  699  719.   32  Chau PYK  Hu PJ H. Investigating healthcare professionals   decisions to accept  telemedicine technology  an empirical test of competing theories. Inf Manag 2002   39 4  297  311.   33  Gagnon M P  Godin G  Gagne C  Fortin J P  Lamothe L  Reinharz D  et al. An  adaptation of the theory of interpersonal behaviour to the study of telemedicine  adoption by physicians. Int J Med Inf 2003 71 2  3  103  15.   34  Helitzer D  Heath D  Maltrud K  Sullivan E  Alverson D. Assessing or predicting  adoption of telehealth using the diffusion of innovations theory  a practical  example from a rural program in New Mexico. Telemed J e Health 2003 9 2    179 87.   35  Spaulding RJ  Russo T  Cook DJ  Doolittle GC. Diffusion theory and telemedicine  adoption by Kansas health care providers  critical factors in telemedicine adoption  for improved patient access. J Telemed Telecare 2005 11 1 suppl  107  9.   36  Kim J  DelliFraine JL  Dansky KH  McCleary KJ. Physicians   acceptance of  telemedicine technology  an empirical test of competing theories. Int J Inf Syst  Change Manag 2010 4 3  210  25.   37  Bennani A E  Oumlil R  editors. Do constructs of technology acceptance model  predict the ICT appropriation by physicians and nurses in healthcare public centres  in Agadir  South of Morocco  HEALTHINF  2010 .   38  Kifle M  Payton FC  Mbarika V  Meso P. Transfer and adoption of advanced  information technology solutions in resource poor environments  the case of  telemedicine systems adoption in Ethiopia. Telemed e Health 2010 16 3  327  43.   39  Gagnon MP  Orru  no E  Asua J  Abdeljelil AB  Emparanza J. Using a modified  technology acceptance model to evaluate healthcare professionals   adoption of a  new telemonitoring system. Telemed e Health 2012 18 1  54  9.   40  Parra C  J odar S  anchez F  Jim enez Hern  andez MD  Vigil E  Palomino Garc a A   Moniche   Alvarez F  et al. Development  implementation  and evaluation of a  telemedicine service for the treatment of acute stroke patients  TeleStroke. Interact  J Med Res 2012 1 2  e15 .   41  Rho MJ  Choi Iy  Lee J. Predictive factors of telemedicine service acceptance and  behavioral intention of physicians. Int J Med Inf 2014 83 8  559  71. A. Garavand et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100943 9 42  Saig  Rubi  o F  Torrent Sellens J  Jim enez Zarco A. Drivers of telemedicine use   comparative evidence from samples of Spanish  Colombian and Bolivian  physicians. Implement Sci 2014 9 1  1  16.   43  Zailani S  Gilani MS  Nikbin D  Iranmanesh M. Determinants of telemedicine  acceptance in selected public hospitals in Malaysia  clinical perspective. J Med Syst  2014 38 9  1  12.   44  The influence of telemedicine experience on physicians   perceptions regarding  adoption. Telemed e Health 2015 21 5  388  94.   45  Saigi Rubi  o F  Jim enez Zarco A  Torrent Sellens J. Determinants of the intention to  use telemedicine  evidence from primary care physicians. Int J Technol Assess  Health Care 2016 32 1  2  29  36.   46  Adenuga KI  Iahad NA  Miskon S. Towards reinforcing telemedicine adoption  amongst clinicians in Nigeria. Int J Med Inf 2017 104 84  96.   47  Shadangi PY  Kar S  Mohanty AK  Dash M. Physician  s attitude towards acceptance  of telemedicine technology for delivering health care services. Int J Mech Eng  Technol 2018 9 11  715  22.   48  Pereyra Rodriguez JJ  Jim enez Zarco AI  Saig  Rubi  o F.  Factors that determine  the intention to use telemedicine in a healthcare organisation . J Healthc Qual Res  2018 33 6  319  28.   49  Ayatollahi H  Mirani N  Nazari F  Razavi N. Iranian healthcare professionals    perspectives about factors influencing the use of telemedicine in diabetes  management. World J Diabetes 2018 9 6  92 .   50  Mengesha GH  Garfield MJ. A contextualized IT adoption and use model for  telemedicine in Ethiopia. Inf Technol Dev 2019 25 2  184  203.   51  Shadangi PY  Dash M  Kar S. Why physician  s keep coming back to telemedicine   predicting using unsupervised learning. Executive Editor 2019 10 1  216 .   52  Almojaibel AA  Munk N  Goodfellow LT  Fisher TF  Miller KK  Comer AR  et al.  Development and validation of the tele pulmonary rehabilitation acceptance scale.  Respir Care 2019 64 9  1057  64.   53  Asiedu GB  Fang JL  Harris AM  Colby CE  Carroll K. Health care professionals    perspectives on teleneonatology through the lens of normalization process theory.  Health Sci Rep 2019 2 2  e111 .   54  Jacob C  Sanchez Vazquez A  Ivory C. Factors impacting clinicians   adoption of a  clinical photo documentation app and its implications for clinical workflows and quality of care  qualitative case study. JMIR mHealth and uHealth 2020 8 9    e20203 .   55  Almojaibel AA  Munk N  Goodfellow LT  Fisher TF  Miller KK  Comer AR  et al.  Health care practitioners   determinants of telerehabilitation acceptance. Int J  Telerehabilitation 2020 12 1  43 .   56  Klingberg A  Sawe HR  Hammar U  Wallis LA  Hasselberg M. m Health for burn  injury consultations in a low resource setting  an acceptability study among health  care providers. Telemed e Health 2020 26 4  395  405.   57  Luciano E  Mahmood MA  Mansouri Rad P. Telemedicine adoption issues in the  United States and Brazil  perception of healthcare professionals. Health Inf J 2020   26 4  2344  61.   58  Nguyen M  Fujioka J  Wentlandt K  Onabajo N  Wong I  Bhatia RS  et al. Using the  technology acceptance model to explore health provider and administrator  perceptions of the usefulness and ease of using technology in palliative care. BMC  Palliat Care 2020 19 1  138 .   59  Haun MW  Stephan I  Wensing M  Hartmann M  Hoffmann M  Friederich H C.  Intent to adopt video based integrated mental health care and the characteristics of  its supporters  mixed methods study among general practitioners applying  diffusion of innovations theory. JMIR Ment. Health 2020 7 10  e23660 .   60  Kissi J  Dai B  Dogbe CS  Banahene J  Ernest O. Predictive factors of physicians    satisfaction with telemedicine services acceptance. Health Inf J 2020 26 3    1866  80.   61  Cao Y  Zhang J  Ma L  Qin X  Li J. Examining user s initial trust building in mobile  online health community adopting. Int J Environ Res Publ Health 2020 17 11    3945 .   62  Lee H  Kim J  Kim S  Kong H J  Joo H  Lee D  et al. Usability evaluation of user  requirement  based teleconsultation robots  a preliminary report from South Korea.  Methods Inf Med 2020 59 2 3  86  95.   63  Almojaibel AA  Munk N  Goodfellow LT  Fisher TF  Miller KK  Comer AR  et al.  Health care practitioners   determinants of telerehabilitation acceptance. Int J  Telerehabilitation 2020 12 1  43  50.   64  Chen J  Lan Y C  Chang Y W  Chang P Y. Exploring doctors   willingness to provide  online counseling services  the roles of motivations and costs. Int J Environ Res  Publ Health 2020 17 1  110 . A. Garavand et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

