Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100903 Available online 14 March 2022 2352 9148   2022 The Author. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license   http   creativecommons.org licenses by 4.0   .AI driven IoT for smart health care  Security and privacy issues  Ismail Keshta  Computer Science and Information Systems Department  College of Applied Sciences  AlMaarefa University  Riyadh  Saudi Arabia    ARTICLE INFO   Keywords   IoT  AI  AIIoT  Health care  Privacy  and security ABSTRACT   The Internet of Things  IoT  has recently brought the dream of a smarter world into an accurate picture with  various services and a significant amount of data. With the innovation of smart Multiple Sensorial Media   MulSeMedia  systems  the cloud  and things technologies   smart health care  is receiving considerable attention  from health care communities  industry  government  and academia. The purpose of the present research has  been to establish the AI driven IoT  AIIoT  security and privacy issues and recommend the manner in which all  such matters can be adequately addressed. The study employed a qualitative study design in which qualitative  information was collected from existing relevant secondary sources. The evidence from the findings shows that  the evolution of AI driven IoT  AIIoT  has added to the significant number of new sensors and devices to the  internet  creating an assortment of security and privacy concerns among the users. The study recommends that  the current requirement for the AI driven IoT  AIIoT  is to have certain types of well defined architecture  standards that include interfaces and data models that ensure that the privacy and security of the users are  enhanced.    1.Introduction  With the innovation of smart multiple sensorial media  MulSeMedia   systems  the cloud  and things technologies   smart health care  is  receiving significant attention from health care communities  industry   government  and academia. The Internet of Things  IoT  has recently  brought the dream of a smarter world into an accurate picture with  many services and a significant amount of data  1 . With the outbreak of  the COVID 19 pandemic  artificial intelligence  AI  has equally gained a  substantial amount of attention by using its machine learning algorithms  for providing quality care to patients. However  the literature points out  that the convergence of AI and IoT can offer new opportunities for the  two technologies. AI driven IoT can play a very important role in smart  health care by providing better insight into specific health care data to  support affordable and quality personalized care  2 . AI driven IoT  might equally support powerful storage and processing facilities of large  amounts of IoT data streams beyond the ability of the individual  things   to provide automated medical decision making in real time. While  scholars have advanced their studies of AI and IoT for health care ser  vices  little attention has been placed on the security and privacy issues  associated with such devices. The AI driven IoT  AIIoT  for smart health  care is able to revolutionize a number of aspects within the health care  industry  however  a number of technical concerns must be addressed  before such potential is achieved  3 . The purpose of this research is to outline AI driven IoT  AIIoT  se  curity  including authentication  access control  security models  and  privacy issues. With the vast number of devices connected to the internet  and the greater quantity of data linked with those connections  there has  always been a significant concern in related security issues that surround  the Internet of Things. The present essay addresses AI driven IoT  AIIoT   security in smart health care and medical devices. Specifically  the essay  presents an analysis of what constitutes IoT security  the unique and  common AI driven IoT  AIIoT  security issues in comparison with  network and information or traditional cybersecurity  the different ap  proaches for IoT security  and the types of security measures that should  be taken in addressing AI driven IoT  AIIoT  security issues. Scholars  argue that since AI driven IoT  AIIoT  is very much associated with in  formation technology and communication  it is prudent to consider  privacy and security challenges that are already known within infor  mation security and examine how all these are transferred into the  present and future state of AI driven IoT  AIIoT   4 . While the literature  affirms that some characteristics make privacy and security challenges  in the AI driven IoT  AIIoT  very much distinct  limited studies have  investigated the real privacy and security issues associated with the IoT  in health care. A deeper investigation on the matter is needed. This  finding informs the reason why the present research will be of great  benefit. Therefore  this paper presents an overview of the challenges and  concerns of AI driven IoT  AIIoT  for smart health care while convergent  E mail address  imohamed mcst.edu.sa .   Contents lists available at ScienceDirect  Informatics in Medicine Unlocked  u   zkw  s yo kr o     1ow  o to 1m y2w m k o2ty   https   doi.org 10.1016 j.imu.2022.100903  Received 10 August 2021  Received in revised form 21 February 2022  Accepted 5 March 2022   

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100903 2on smart health care systems.  1.1. Broad objectives  To present an overview of the security  privacy  and trust challenges  and concerns of AI driven IoT  AIIoT  for smart health care convergent  systems.  1.2. Specific objectives  The present essay seeks to achieve the following specific objectives    a. To identify security  privacy  and trust challenges and concerns of AI   driven IoT  AIIoT  for the smart health care systems.   b. To outline the type of security  privacy  and trust measures that  should be taken when applying AI driven IoT  AIIoT  for smart  health care systems.  2.Materials and methods  2.1. Study design  The present study did develop a systematic review of secondary  literature in relation to the study topic. A good research study is one that  has the ability to access secondary data from an appropriate source and  make use of the information. According to Smith et al.  5   a vast amount  of information has been archived over the years. Therefore  it is practical  to utilize existing data and information to conduct secondary research.  Crowther et al.  6  argue that secondary data analysis involves  analyzing and interpreting data collected by another researcher for  another purpose. This approach is a viable research method that is less  costly and saves on time spent going to the field for data collection. This  method was proposed for this study because it considers the resources  and time available to the researcher. Si et al.  7  argue that secondary  data are accessed easily and help to define the problem better and have  clear insight and understanding into the problem to help formulate and  apply interventions. The current study ensures that the information used  was current  relevant to the study  and accurate.  2.2. Sampling procedure  A sampling process of the secondary literature involved selecting  secondary data that were accessible online and had some relevancy to  matters about security  privacy  and trust challenges and concerns of AI   driven IoT  AIIoT  for smart health care convergent systems. For any  given article to be chosen as a sample within this study  it had to be  specific to the AI driven IoT  AIIoT   emphasizing security  authenti   cation  access control  security models  and privacy concerns  even more  within smart health care centers. For the other thesis studies and  scholarly review articles  the study was picked for review in this study  only if it met the inclusion criteria that had already been written.  In other words  the study had been conducted to identify specific  security and privacy risks associated with AI driven IoT  AIIoT   data  had been generated from very reliable sources  or random sampling had  been applied in the collection of such data  among other things. Data  that had been collected through random sampling were offered first  priority during the process of systematic review due to the many ad  vantages that randomization enjoys over the other methods of data  collection  such as nonrandomized sampling  which in the majority of  cases always have some form of business.  A systematic literature review was one of the most effective methods  that could be applied in the general analysis of the matters pertaining to  security  privacy  and trust challenges and the concerns of AI driven IoT   AIIoT  for smart health care convergent systems. Abstracts and titles of  all of the links that had been selected were checked first  and only the  sources of data that appeared to be within the criteria of inclusion had their content generated and the hard copy printed to help in the analysis.  The content of all of these sources of data was then scanned to ensure  that they were actually related to issues about security  privacy  and  trust challenges and the concerns of AI driven IoT  AIIoT  for smart  health care systems  and second  the type of security  privacy  and trust  measures that should be taken when applying AI driven IoT  AIIoT  for  smart health care systems. No other thing was accepted except for the  literature that contains the content required in the study objective.  Additionally  more evaluation was performed on all of the selected  sources to ensure that they were very appropriate for inclusion in the  review. The critical questions used in the evaluation comprised whether  the article or journal had adequately addressed the broad objective of  the study. The validity of the information source was also given some  consideration to confirm whether the arguments in the books and arti  cles would be relevant to the risks posted by the AI driven IoT  AIIoT   and to what extent the security and privacy risks could be addressed.  2.3. Data collection process  The literature search was performed to establish instances of privacy  and security breaches in the application of AI driven IoT  AIIoT  in  smart health care. Appropriate secondary sources for review included  journal articles  books  and periodicals on security  privacy  and trust  challenges and concerns of AI driven IoT  AIIoT  for smart health care  convergent systems. The university library database was used to find  books and other scholarly articles. Each article was generated by first  entering relevant keywords into databases within computer systems.  The researcher made a search of different peer reviewed articles from  various databases  which included Google Scholar  EBSCOhost  ERIC   and Academic OneFile. Different keywords were used in making the  search. Words such as  Information Security Culture     privacy     AI   driven IoT   and  Smart health care  were used in the search process. The  articles and papers were selected from the above search results based  upon reference to an approach or a set of recommendations for  addressing security  privacy  and trust challenges and concerns of AI   driven IoT  AIIoT  for smart health care convergent systems.  The search strategy applied in a number of organization databases  reflects 5000 records  which also comprise the conventional research  studies and other health institutions   reports. Despite having substantial  amounts of data accessible through the search strategy  a data cleaning  process was heavily applied  removing all duplicates. After removing all  of the duplicates  2 135  the titles and abstracts of the remaining 2865  articles were reviewed. A further 2500 were excluded because they did  not meet the inclusion criteria. Furthermore  no study on  ongoing re  view  was included. Other studies were excluded based on design and  general research methodology. The PRISMA study flowchart  Fig. 1  below  illustrates the search results.  2.4. Data synthesis and analysis  Both ongoing and recursive data analysis approaches were applied to  analyze the qualitative data. The literature by James et al.  8  has al  ways indicated that there are two main strategies for analysis  holistic  and categorical analysis. The researcher opted for categorical analysis in  analyzing the qualitative data in this paper. It is essential to mention that  categorical analysis involves coding as well as sorting out of data into  categories that had already been established  while the holistic  approach  on the other hand  involves given programs  situations  and  experiences. The literature clarifies that the holistic approach is pri  marily based on narration and description. To enhance qualitative  analysis  researchers are encouraged to apply both holistic and cate  gorical analysis. While Tealab  9  argues that ethnographers can always  gather data through artifacts  interviews  and physical observation  the  qualitative data used in this paper mainly came from documents and  systematic reviews of existing scholarly literature. The study was not  focused on qualitative data. I. Keshta                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100903 3The present study  s main focus was on assessing matters that pertain  to security  privacy  and trust challenges and the concerns of AI driven  IoT  AIIoT  for smart hospitals and medical devices. Therefore  a per  mutation of all inclusive and definite strategies was somewhat critical   because the researcher would analyze qualitative data from secondary  literature through the categorical strategy. The categories developed in  this case would guide further analysis processes. For the purpose of portraying the perceptions of the examined literature on security and  privacy risks associated with the AI driven IoT  AIIoT   the application  of holistic analysis was found by the researcher to be of more importance  immediately after developing categories since the researcher narrated  the literature findings that pertained to security  privacy  and trust  challenges and the concerns of AI driven IoT  AIIoT  for smart hospitals.  As indicated in Munn et al.  9   these two strategies for analysis are not  Fig. 1.PRISMA study flowchart of search results.  Source  Author  s own generation I. Keshta                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100903 4exclusive to each other. The researcher  therefore  applied them together  to assist in the analysis of the qualitative data.  2.5. Ethical considerations  The first important ethical issue during the research process was  obtaining approvals from the relevant authorities. Second  all of the  secondary information that was used in the study was collected with at  most good faith and has been properly acknowledged through in text  citation and listing all of the relevant literature within the reference  list. The works of other scholars have been appropriately acknowledged  to avoid the problem of plagiarism.  3.Findings and discussion  3.1. Usage of the AI driven IoT  AIIoT  for smart health care convergent  systems  The health care sector remains one of the fastest sectors in the world  to adopt AI driven IoT  AIIoT . Integrating AI driven IoT features into  individual medical devices tends to improve the quality and effective   ness of the specific service offered  this approach tends to be very  valuable for individual patients who have any form of chronic condi   tions  elderly individuals  and those who require continuous care. As per  the study conducted by Sodhro et al.  spending made on health care  AIIoT solutions will reach one trillion US dollars by 2025  10 . It is  possible that this situation could help set the stage for having highly  accessible  personalized  and on time health care services for each in  dividual. Fig. 2 illustrates an example of a smart health care system.  Different hospitals have been adopting AI driven IoT for a number of  years. It is very common to witness AI driven IoT devices in rooms of  patients  electronic medical records  and other cloud based resources.  Scholars predict that digital health care will help to revolutionize the  whole health care industry by increasing access to diagnosis  preventive  care  and treatment and seriously minimizing the relevant costs  12 .  Keeping track of patients who are considered to be high risk is a great  challenge in keeping down the health care cost. Management of chronic  disease is responsible for approximately 30  of the spending on health  care in the US  and a more significant proportion of such expenditures is  associated with heart disease  diabetes  and asthma.  Artificial intelligence driven Internet of Things devices such as  remote monitoring will make it very possible for health care providers to  routinely keep track of high risk patients. The analysts see the chance of  saving up to 350 billion US dollars from digital health care  with more  than USD 200 billion of that likely to come from the management of  chronic infections  mostly by eliminating wasteful and redundant expenses  13 . The AI driven IoT can also be described as an artificial  intelligence driven Internet of Medical Things. In such a case  the  Internet of Medical Things would be a collection of all medical devices  and the corresponding applications that tend to connect to health care  information technology systems via a computer network. The Internet of  Medical Things  in this case  is medical equipment with Wi Fi connec   tivity that tends to communicate with other equipment  13 . Such a  group of devices can link with the cloud storage provided by Amazon  AWS to store data that have been captured that can later be analyzed.  The literature demonstrates that several areas exist in health care in  which the AI driven IoT can play a crucial role. Examples of such areas  are elder care  which involves tracking elderly residence at hospitals and  nursing homes and gathering relevant data  11 . It includes several  types of equipment that are seen at the bedside within hospitals  such as  EKG monitors. This area has continued to expand  with present in  novations occurring across the world of AI driven IoT.  As the usage of AI driven IoT increases within the health care sector   it is likely to benefit both health care providers and individual patients.  Treatments that patients receive are enhanced by remote monitoring  and communication  areas within which the AI driven IoT can play a  very large role  11 . The other usage of health care AI driven IoT is  mobile medical applications or wearable devices that make it possible  for patients to capture their individual health data. Most of this aspect  can be attributed to the data revolution  which empowers the general  population to live healthier lives by making good use of connected de  vices such as wearables  tablets  and hand held devices  See Fig. 3 .  Analysis of the data collected via electronic medical records  the  individual diagnostic information collected through imaging equipment  and individual handheld devices tend to enhance the power for decision   making  14 . This aspect can allow individual patients to take a very  active role in managing their individual personal health. In the future   such data rich personalized analysis of individual health will be an  excellent standard. Patients will be offered tailor made strategies to help  fight illness. From the data generated  people learn in the manner in  which they can improve their wellbeing  and they will also be seriously  motivated to take control of their individual lives  15 . Scholars argue  that there is a new industry within clinical decision support software  a  growing sector that is specifically related to AI driven IoT that boosts the  function of the connected devices by using their applications more  directly in clinical decisions.  3.2. Security issues in the AI driven IoT  With the high rate of adopting AI driven IoT  a very large number of  devices are connected to the internet. On a daily basis  such smart ob  jects continue to be on target for their risk to information security  16 .  For example  toward the end of 2018  two security scholars discovered  more than sixty eight thousand medical systems that had been exposed  Fig. 2.An example of a smart health care system.  Source  11   Fig. 3.Illustrating the potential benefits of AI driven IoT in health care   Fadaeddini 16 . I. Keshta                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100903 5online  and more than 12 000 of them belonged to a single health care  organization. One important concern regarding this discovery was that  the devices were connected to the internet via computers that were  running a very old version of Windows XP  an OS version that is widely  understood to pose a large number of vulnerabilities that can be  exploited  17 . Such devices were discovered by the use of Shodan  a  search engine that is capable of finding AI driven IoT devices online.  These are very easy to hack through a system called brute force attacks  and through the application of hard coded logins. During the time of  their research  the two scientists revealed anesthesia equipment  infu  sion systems  nuclear medical systems  and simple shodan queries  18 .  The researchers  in this case  reported that the attackers did manage to  authenticate through SSH on such fake medical devices over 50 000  times  and they even left several malware payloads  19 . The re  searchers  in this case  also found that in the majority of the cases  the  attackers did not realize what they had hacked and left an infected  machine behind as part of their individual botnets.  3.3. Privacy threats in the IoT in medical health care  Possible threats in the AI driven Internet of Things are very difficult  to quantify based on the large uncertainties in how and whether the  Internet of Things will influence the entire society. On the same note  we  can currently observe the impact of the collection of larger quantities of  data from smartphone sensors  social media  and mobile network op  erators  20 . The general implication of the breakthrough of the  AI driven IoT on the aspect of privacy can best be studied based on the  experiences of how such technologies tend to be impacted by privacy. By  applying this parallel  it can be inferred that even if the data transmitted  by a given endpoint device might not result in any issue related to pri  vacy  per se  the amount of data that is accumulated from different de  vices can also create some types of privacy problems  10 . Additionally   some characteristics tend to make privacy threats to the AI driven IoT  more challenging. The process of collecting data is largely passive  less  intrusive  and more pervasive  making the users become minimally  aware that they are being tracked. Choi et al. illustrated the IoT com  ponents  respective vulnerabilities and threat attack type  as summarized in Table 1. As illustrated in the table  physical attacks   integrating RFID  integrating WSNS  DOS DDOS  and unauthorized data  access are some of the major threats or vulnerability of IoT components.  The literature has acknowledged the fact that AI driven IoT is  pervasive in its general nature  in which case different devices tend to  sense and collect data regarding the users as well as their environment to  offer some specific type of services. Data that have been collected in this  case are processed at the health care service providers  which are situ  ated within the control of the users  12 . Data anonymization  which is  always done  that is  replacing personal information with a type of  randomly generated distinctive ID  is never sufficient to allow for the  anonymity of such users  and it has clearly been demonstrated that the  individual identities of the users can be inferred from a group of ano  nymized datasets. A good example to explain such privacy breaches  includes the case of a group of insurance commissions in Massachusetts   which bought health insurance for state employees and released records  for every hospital visit by the state employees at no cost to any scholar  who wanted such data  13 . To protect the privacy of the patient  the  data were specifically anonymized by eliminating fields such as address   name  and social security number  although the ZIP code  gender and  birthdate were never removed.  Literature reports that even after eliminating the explicit identifiers  from the existing medical data  in a majority of the cases  the remaining  part of the data  such as ZIP code  date of birth  and gender  was suf  ficient to help reidentify individuals when trying to link them with the  public voter database  11 . To be more specific  Sweeney could reveal  and even send the health records of the governor  including the diag  nosis and prescriptions  to his office. The governors assured the general  public that such a release of GIC data would not specifically compromise  the privacy of the patient  14 . It is important to demonstrate that a  serious privacy breach of AOL search data did occur when AOLs released  more than 20 million search enquiries using the internet to engage more  academic scholars.  AOL had assigned every user a type of unique identification number   although the information  in this case  was very much detailed and  personal and one could easily reveal a number of identities of the users  and subsequently compromise their individual privacy  14 . The online  DVD rental company  Netflix  announced in 2006 a type of open  competition to initiate an algorithm that could help improve the  recommendation system of its movie by more than 10 . Together with  the existing contest  Netflix released a number of training datasets to the  existing competitors  including more than 100 million movie ratings   provided by more than half a million users to close to 20 000 movies   15 . The name of the movies and the users  in this case  were replaced  by a number of numerical IDs to help anonymize the existing dataset.  Rayan  12  could  however  identify many anonymized Netflix users  by making a comparison to the set of data with the individual reviews  that were posted on the internet Movie Database  16 . The experiment  did show that it was very much possible to identify the political leanings  of the users as well as their individual sexual references. This scandal  resulted in a lawsuit that was made against Netflix  which subsequently  led to the termination of the subsequent round of the contest in 2010 due  to concerns about privacy  19 . Within the AI driven IoT  new tech  nologies  as well as the interconnection of such features and techniques   have magnified the overall threat of being identified.  The use of surveillance camera technology  within the contexts of  nonsecurity  is a good example of such relevant techniques  in which  case the behaviors of the clients are studied for the purpose of marketing  and analysis. In the most recent case scenario  one of the largest drug  chain stores in Russia began to apply software for recognizing emotion  as a type of pilot test for sensing the facial expression of the customer   19 . The main goal of such technology is to provide a type of custom   ized discount in real time for each individual customer based on how she  is feeling and again reviewing her individual purchase history as well as  preferences. The automated identification of people from a type of  digital image or even a video frame is already being used by the agencies Table 1  IoT components  vulnerabilities and threat attack types in IoT health care  applications.   IoT components Vulnerabilities Threats Attack Types  Physical Objects   Devices of this layer have  limited calculation   communication and storage  resources   Physical attacks    Nodes are distributed in  distant locations  an  adversary can easily access  the devices and perform  damage and illegal actions  such as extract security  information and keys   reprogram the devices  etc.   Integrating RFID    Integrating WSNS    DOS DDOS    Unauthorized data access  and access control  Communication  Technologies   Lot is dynamic network  infrastructure.   Wireless PAN LAN  communications    Low power   Wireless WAN  communications    Lossy network   Secure lot  communication protocols  in constrained resources  environment    The challenges of selection  security technique for each  element.   Secure transmitted data    Defense capability of the  network varies in different  networks.  Source  10  I. Keshta                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100903 6responsible for law enforcement in several nations.  Speech recognition is very much applied in mobile applications  and  a large number of databases of speech samples are already being built   which can possibly be applied to identify and recognize different in  dividuals. The overall increasing interconnection as well as the vertical  communication of things tends to open up the chances for making  identification of devices by fingerprinting  21 . For instance  it is clearly  demonstrated that it is very possible to apply the radio frequency  identification profile of an individual to trace them. To handle such  problems  attribute based authentication is offered to help to minimize  communication in AI driven IoT data and to maintain control over the  general disclosure of such data and improve overall user privacy in the  AI driven IoT.  The evolution of the AI driven Internet of Things has continued to  add several billions of new sensors as well as some other devices into the  internet  creating a great amount of information in relation to people   including their individual locations  health records  connections  pic  tures  voices  financial transactions  and conversations  among other  items  21 . Surya  17  points out that AI driven IoT is likely to impact  almost everything and every individual in a manner that is not pre  cedented from health care inventions  22 . The AI driven IoT will be  everywhere  which shows that when changes occur  such changes will  impact almost everything  17 . However  the author acknowledges that  key among the important issues that involves virtuality will be privacy.  The literature identifies tracking and localization as the threats of  trying to determine and record the location of a person through time and  space using various methods  such as GPS data  internet traffic  and cell  phone location  18 . The existence of large amounts of data and detailed  spatiotemporal and spatial data  which has become possible as a result of  techniques for data collection  such as the global positioning system   location aware services  high resolution remote sensing  and  internet based volunteered geographic information  has resulted in an  ever increasing interest in the application of geographic data as well as  incorporating spatial information into relevant analysis.  To maintain the privacy of the users  such a group of datasets is  anonymized  in other words  every patient s name and numbers are  replaced by a randomly acquired ID that is unique on its own before they  are transferred to the third party. However  scholars argue that even  such methods might not guarantee anonymization and protection of  sensitive personal data  20 . The literature affirms that the integration  of the known geographic information systems together with social net  works has led to what is known as location based social networks  which  are social networks that contain location information in their individual  contents. Such capabilities have made real time urban sensing very  much possible. Majumder et al.  2496  outline the privacy issues in IoT  health care applications  as summarized in Table 2.  Butpheng et al.  3 5  argue that localization within the adjacent  surroundings is never perceived as a privacy threat  since others are  usually observed by other people within their individual field of view   1 . However  localization is seen as a large threat  especially when the  information is recorded  processed and finally stored without having the  permission and control of the subjects in question. As with other con  cepts of privacy  the absence of control is key to the general concept of privacy location  which is described as the strong ability to prevent some  other parties from trying to learn an individual s present or even past  location  2 .  By the real emergence of the AI driven IoT  numerous factors could  possibly exaggerate the overall privacy threat of the localization because  there will be expansion of the possible location aware applications as  well as overall improvements in their accuracy  the overall ubiquity of  data collection technology and the whole process involved  and finally   the interaction with the devices for the AI driven IoT that register the  location  identity  and activity of the user. The present studies on loca  tion privacy  such as the trusted third party and peer to peer aspects   among others  primarily deal with location aware applications within  smartphones and never encompass location privacy threats within the  AI driven IoT. Wang et al.  281  identifies three major challenges   addressing the general threats of a pervasive collection of data  the  manner to control the shared location data  and privacy preserving  protocols for proper interaction with the Internet of Things systems  3 .  4.Conclusions and recommendations  4.1. Conclusions  Errors made in health care setup are not only costly but also harmful.  The literature reports that medical errors are responsible for thousands  of deaths annually all over the world  both in developed and developing  countries. Regarding a study conducted on 37 million records of pa  tients  approximately 195 thousand people usually die in the United  States of America as a result of medical errors committed by clinicians  and would easily be prevented. The situation is even worst in developing  countries in Africa  where the figure triples at times. It is therefore very  clear that powerful clinical decision support systems are needed for the  purpose of reducing the time of diagnosis and increasing the accuracy  for disease diagnosis. AI driven IoT has evolved from traditional statis   tical algorithms to neural networks that are somewhat artificially com  plex. The usage of tools of data mining and IoT has become commonly  used in clinical applications for making health related decisions in a  more effective manner. A number of techniques of data mining  such as  decision trees  artificial neural networks  support vector machines   Bayesian networks  and bagging algorithms  have been used widely in  clinical support systems for making health related decisions.  Having a comprehensive knowledge base and advanced functional   ities plays an important role in designing an efficient smart health care  system. Artificial neural networks and data mining have attracted  considerable attention in designing clinical support due to their abilities  to discover hidden patterns and relationships in medical data. This paper  aims to review the performance of data mining applications in clinical  decision support systems and analyze the potential data mining chal  lenges that can support researchers in better understanding of data  mining in this area while conducting research in the future.  4.2. Recommendations  It is wise to note that the security and privacy challenges associated  with the AI driven IoT need to be handled on a permanent basis to  realize its maturation and growth. First  it is important to acknowledge  the fact that AI driven IoT tends to use varied devices  protocols  and  services to realize an intended goal. To integrate the network for the  Internet of Things frameworks for the purpose of achieving a greater  framework  for instance  to form a smart health care system by inte  grating several smart hospitals  there is a great need for the establish   ment of a set of standards that ought to be followed correctly from the  micro to the macro levels of realizing the Internet of Things. The current  requirements for the Internet of Things are actually to have properly  defined architecture standards that include interfaces  data models  and  relevant protocols that are able to support a wider range of devices   humans  operating systems  and languages. Table 2  Major privacy issues and associated solutions in IoT health care applications.   Privacy issues IoT based solutions  PHRS exposure Encryption before outsourcing  dividing health  system into domains  analyzing sensitive data to be  private or not.  Cyberattacks Detection methods and system recovery.  Data eavesdropping and data  confidentiality Data hiding and cryptographic techniques.  Identity threats and privacy  of stored data Pseudonymization of medical data  identity  management  anonymity.  Location privacy Security protocols.  I. Keshta                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100903 7Second  there is a need for identity management to solve both the  security and privacy risks associated with the AI driven IoT. Identity  management within the Internet of Things can simply be undertaken by  trying to exchange identifying relevant information between the things  for all of the first time connections. Such a process can be very suscep   tible to eavesdropping  which can subsequently result in a type of man   in the middle attack and can therefore actually jeopardize the whole  framework of the AI driven IoT. There are therefore some great needs for  a type of predefined management entity of an identity or hub that can  monitor the overall connection process of the relevant devices through  the application of cryptography plus some other relevant techniques  to  help prevent the theft of identity.  As outlined by most authors  the three layer architecture of the AI   driven IoT never accommodates the actual opening  closing and  adequate management of a session between the two existing things.  There is therefore a great need for protocols that can address all such  issues and can eventually ease the mode of communication between the  relevant devices. There is a great need to accommodate an abstract  session layer as a form of additional layer within the architecture of AI   driven IoT  which is capable of managing protocols  connections  and  relevant sessions  which are there between the communications of the  relevant heterogeneous devices.  In conclusion  it is evident that the AI driven IoT frameworks used  both in smart medical devices are highly susceptible to different forms of  security and privacy threats  therefore  there exist many security and  privacy challenges as well as relevant requirements that all must be  addressed. The present amount of research carried out on the issues of  AI driven IoT is basically focused on the access and authentication  control protocols  although with the advancement of modern technol   ogy  it is very important to actually incorporate some other new  networking protocols  such as IPv6 and 5G  to realize a dynamic mashup  of the Internet of Things topology. The main developments that have  been witnessed in the AI driven IoT are primarily on a smaller scale   such as within small hospitals. For AI driven IoT to be scaled up  there  are several security and privacy concerns that have to be addressed in a  proper manner. It is true that AI driven IoT has a great ability to  transform the way in which we live today.  However  the greatest concern in achieving complete smart frame   works is security. In the event that security concerns such as confiden   tiality  privacy  access control  authentication  end to end security  trust  management  global standards and relevant policies are completely  addressed in the correct manner  it will be very much possible to realize  the transformation of almost everything in the health care sector by the  IoT within the future to come. There is a great need for new wireless   identification  software and hardware technologies to resolve all of the  privacy and security challenges within the IoT  such as the standards for  devices that are heterogeneous in nature  trying to implement important  management together with identity establishment systems and hubs for  trust management. The governance of AI driven IoT to ensure privacy  and security remains the main challenges in the implementation of IoT  in both smart homes and medical devices. Implementing a proper  governance framework is essential for the success of AI driven IoT across  different aspects of architecture through implementation standards.  Declaration of competing interest  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial  interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.  Acknowledgment  The author deeply acknowledges the Researchers Supporting Pro  gram  TUMA Project 2021 14   AlMaarefa University  Riyadh  Saudi  Arabia for supporting steps of this work.  Reference   1 Butpheng C  Yeh K H  Xiong H. Security and privacy in IoT cloud based e health  systems a comprehensive review. Symmetry Jul. 2020 12 7  1191. https   doi.  org 10.3390 sym12071191  Online . Available .   2 Firouzi F  Farahani B  Barzegari M  Daneshmand M. AI driven data monetization   the other face of data in IoT based smart and connected health. In  IEEE Internet  Things J.  2020. https   doi.org 10.1109 JIOT.2020.3027971.   3 Wang M  Zhu T  Zhang T  Zhang J  Yu S  Zhou W. Security and privacy in 6G  networks  new areas and new challenges. Digital Commun Netw 2020 6 3    281 91.   4 Kim H  Ben Othman J  Mokdad L  Son J  Li C. Research challenges and security  threats to AI driven 5G virtual emotion applications using autonomous vehicles   drones  and smart devices. 6. In  IEEE network  vol. 34  Nov Dec 2020. p. 288 94.  https   doi.org 10.1109 MNET.011.2000245.   5 Smith V  Devane D  Begley CM  Clarke M. Methodology in conducting a systematic  review of systematic reviews of healthcare interventions. BMC Med Res Methodol  2011 11 1  1 6.   6 Crowther M  Lim W  Crowther MA. Systematic review and meta analysis  methodology. The Journal of the American Society of Hematology Blood Oct 2010   116 17  3140 6.   7 Si SL  You XY  Liu HC  Zhang P. DEMATEL technique  a systematic review of the  state of the art literature on methodologies and applications. 2018 Math Probl Eng  2018. https   doi.org 10.1155 2018 3696457  Online   Available .   8 James KL  Randall NP  Haddaway NR. A methodology for systematic mapping in  environmental sciences. Environ Evid 2016 5 1  1 13.   9 Munn Z  Peters MD  Stern C  Tufanaru C  McArthur A  Aromataris E. Systematic  review or scoping review  Guidance for authors when choosing between a  systematic or scoping review approach. BMC Med Res Methodol 2018 18 1  1 7.   10  Sodhro AH  Pirbhulal S  de Albuquerque VHC. Artificial intelligence driven  mechanism for edge computing based industrial applications. 7. In  IEEE  Transactions on Industrial Informatics  vol. 15  July 2019. p. 4235 43.   11  Garbuio M  Lin N. Artificial intelligence as a growth engine for health care startups   emerging business models. Calif Manag Rev 2019 61 2  59 83.   12  Gerke S  Minssen T  Cohen G. Ethical and legal challenges of artificial intelligence   driven healthcare. Academic Press Artificial intelligence in healthcare 2020   295 336.   13  Nadia Ghomsheh A  Farahani B  Kavian M. A hierarchical privacy preserving IoT  architecture for vision based hand rehabilitation assessment. Multimed Tool Appl  2021 1 24. https   doi.org 10.1007 s11042 021 10563 2  Online   Available .   14  Puaschunder JM. The legal and international situation of AI  robotics and big data  with attention to healthcare. In  Report on behalf of the European Parliament  European liberal Forum  2019. https   doi.org 10.2139 ssrn.3472885  Online    Available .   15  Fadaeddini A  Majidi B  Eshghi M. Privacy preserved decentralized deep learning  a  blockchain based solution for secure ai driven enterprise. International Congress  on High Performance Computing and Big Data Analysis. Cham  Springer  2019.   16  Rayan RA  Christos T  Romash BI. The internet of things for healthcare   applications  selected cases and challenges. IoT in Healthcare and Ambient Assisted  Living. Singapore  Springer  2021. p. 1 15.   17  Ergen O  Belcastro KD. Ai Driven advanced Internet of Things  Iotx2   the future  seems irreversibly connected in medicine. Anatol J Cardiol Oct 2019 22 2  15 7.   18  Majumder S  Aghayi E  Noferesti M  Memarzadeh Tehran H  Mondal T  Pang Z   Deen MJ. Smart homes for elderly healthcare recent advances and research  challenges. Sensors 2017 17 11  2496.   19  Maazouzi F  Zarzour H. AI driven big healthcare analytics  contributions and  challenges. In  Intelligent analytics with advanced multi industry applications  Z. Sun.  IGI Global  Papua New Guinea  2021. p. 172 84.   20  Choi DH  Shon D. Future changes to smart home based on AAL healthcare service.  J Asian Architect Build Eng 2019 18 3  190 9.   21  Reddy S  Allan S  Coghlan S  Cooper P. A governance model for the application of  AI in health care. J Am Med Inf Assoc 2020 27 3  491 7.   22  Surya L. IoT security techniques based on machine learning  how IoT devices use AI  to enhance security. Int J Comput Trends Technol 2021 67. I. Keshta                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

