Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100910 Available online 18 March 2022 2352 9148   2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY NC ND license   http   creativecommons.org licenses by  nc nd 4.0   .Applications  features and key indicators for the development of Covid 19  dashboards  A systematic review study  Akram Vahedia  Hamid Moghaddasia  Farkhondeh Asadia    Azam Sadat Hosseinia   Eslam Nazemib  aDepartment of Health Information Technology and Management  Faculty of Paramedical Sciences  Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences  Tehran  Iran  bComputer Engineering Faculty  Shahid Beheshti University  Tehran  Iran    ARTICLE INFO   Keywords   Dashboard  COVID 19  Data management ABSTRACT   Introduction  Interactive dashboards can collect data from various information sources and be used nationally and  internationally. These information systems have played an important role in managing and controlling epidemic  diseases  especially Covid 19. This study aimed to identify the applications  features  and key indicators of  advanced dashboards in Covid 19.  Method  The present article is a systematic review study that searched the PubMed  Scopus  and ISI web of  sciences databases in 2021 by combining the relevant keywords. After applying the inclusion and exclusion  criteria and selecting articles  data collection was prepared using a data collection form. Data analysis was  performed using the content analysis method.  Results  Out of 171 articles retrieved  19 were included in the study for review by applying inclusion and  exclusion criteria in the first stage. The most important data sources for the studied dashboards included general  online  national  and hospital databases. Monitoring and tracking in the target community and resource man  agement  hospital and public  are the most important issues in Covid 19 dashboards. The study showed that KPIs  in 5 main categories of indicators related to hospital beds  clinical data in the hospital  diagnostic and therapeutic  measures of hospitals  epidemiological data at the level community  and follow up indicators of Covid 19 studies  were worldwide.  Conclusion  Considering the technological advances at the world level and the large amount of data produced   one of the effective solutions for managing and controlling epidemic and pandemic conditions and diseases is the  rapid development of interactive dashboards  Therefore  it is suggested that health officials and policymakers  in  addition to developing and updating the existing dashboards in the field of Covid 19  developing the dashboard  immediately in case of similar conditions.    1.Introduction  Covid 19 was declared an epidemic disease by the World Health  Organization  WHO  on March 11  2020  1 . The management of this  crisis requires policy making  coordination  and coherence in imple   mentation  centralized information  organization  continuous moni   toring  and management of crisis medicine  2 . Crisis management in  this area requires reliable information for appropriate decision making.  Providing accurate and reliable information is one of the most important  policy strategies for control and preventive measures concerning the  disease  3 .  Due to the impact of Covid 19 disease worldwide  different countries have implemented various programs and policies in various dimensions  such as health  policy  and management to deal with it. One of the most  effective and widely used solutions for managing Covid 19 is informa   tion technology  4 5 . Covid 19 data management using information  technology can be made available to managers and policymakers by  providing online information to help make evidence based decisions   effectively manage the disease  reduce its effects and consequences at  the community level  and ultimately reduce mortality and eradicate it to  play an effective role  6 9 . Dashboards are one of the most widely used  information technologies in Covid 19 management  10 11 .  Dashboard is an intelligent and analytical tool that collects data from  various information systems and presents them in a concise    Corresponding author. Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences and Health Services  Faculty of Paramedical Sciences  Tehran.  E mail address  asadifar sbmu.ac.ir  F. Asadi .   Contents lists available at ScienceDirect  Informatics in Medicine Unlocked  u   zkw  s yo kr o     1ow  o to 1m y2w m k o2ty   https   doi.org 10.1016 j.imu.2022.100910  Received 11 January 2022  Received in revised form 5 March 2022  Accepted 6 March 2022   

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100910 2comprehensive  meaningful  and intelligent way using visual features in  the form of key performance indicators for faster decision making so that  managers to be able to take a brief look at the current situation in terms  of whether the evaluation performance is desirable or undesirable   identify existing problems and analyze their root causes  and finally   improve their performance  12 13  . For this reason  various dashboards  have been designed and used in the world to deal with this disease in a  limited period. Dashboards effectively integrate and properly dissemi   nate information as part of decision support systems  14 .  Dashboards  by providing up to date  accurate  and concise infor  mation through data mining technologies  can provide management  reports to stakeholders in the shortest possible time  thus reducing de  cision costs and increasing managers   decision making power  and  reducing medical errors by providing a better relationship between the  decision making process and quality improvement in the field of health   15 17 . Therefore  the development and maintenance of dashboards  are essential to measuring performance  improving decisions  evaluating  and managing a comprehensive range of health care provided to pa  tients  and providing management services  15 . Due to the need to use  dashboards in the last two years  many studies have been conducted on  the design and use of dashboards in the face and control of the Covid 19  pandemic. In the study by Ivankovi  c et al.  158 designed dashboards  during the outbreak of Covid 19 were identified and examined to control  and manage the disease worldwide  in 53 countries . Government or  ganizations developed 63  of dashboards  and 58.9  are operated  nationally. Although all the dashboards studied included epidemiolog   ical indicators  a limited number of them stated their main purpose and  intended users. Only 7 of the dashboards addressed the social and eco  nomic indicators of individuals. Almost a quarter of the dashboards  studied did not report their data sources  18 . In a study by Dixit et al.  a  regional dashboard was designed in the United States in 2020 to rapidly  design a dashboard to raise awareness of the use of telehealth in  covid 19 in a multi hospital health care system  19 . Florez et al.  designed and implemented a dashboard to assess the incidence and  mortality of Covid 19 internationally and noted the positive impact of its  use in the control of Covid 19  20 . In another study  Ibrahim et al.  conducted a study to develop and use a clinical intelligent dashboard for  frontline physicians to optimize important resources along covid 19   which could interact and receive information from the electronic  health record  EHR   21 . Considering that many studies have been  conducted in the design and use of dashboards about Covid 19 world   wide  the present study has been conducted to identify the applications   features  and key indicators of covid 19 dashboards.  2.Methods  The present study is a systematic review conducted in 2021 based on  the PRISMA Statement  22 .  3.Search for source  To access electronic search resources in three scientific databases   PubMed  Scopus  and ISI Web of Sciences  was conducted from 2019 to  2020. The combination of keywords in   1 and   2 in Table 1 was used  in various forms to find the articles related to the study. 4.Inclusion and exclusion criteria  All conducted studies on the design and use of interactive dashboards  to deal with Covid 19 were included in the study. The selected studies  were original research articles in English. Articles related to other  dashboards  non interactive  and monitoring systems were excluded.  Dashboards related to other diseases and epidemics were excluded from  the study. All articles published in languages other than English were  excluded. Review articles  letters to the editor  short articles  case re  ports  and other reports were excluded from the study.  5.Data collection  Data collection was performed using a data extraction form from the  articles included in the study. The relevant form has three main sections   a  Bibliographic information of the articles including the title of the  article  the name of the journal  the names of the authors  the year of  publication of the article  and the country b  Features of dashboards in  studies including dashboard subject  dashboard type and software were  used for dashboard development and c  The content of the dashboards in  the studies included key performance indicators and the most important  results from the use of the dashboard. Data collection was done by two  researchers independently  and in case of any discrepancies  the third  person was referred  all three were discussed  and the consensus was  reached.  Quality assessment of studies has been done by Newcastle Ottawa  Scale  NOS  as a standard tool for assessing the quality of observa   tional studies  23  with some modifications for health information  systems quality of studies assessment  24 . Based on the assessment that  was done by the authors the selected studies have the quality for  including in the review.  6.Data analysis  After collecting the data  using the content analysis technique  the  study data were analyzed and summarized and reported based on the  objectives of the study.  7.Results  Out of 171 articles found in the first stage of the search  19 articles  were finally included in the study by applying inclusion and exclusion  criteria  Fig. 1 .  The information and characteristics of the articles included in the  study are shown in Table 2. This table shows the year  country  type of  software used for development and visualization  dashboard inter  activity status  the main purpose  and the most important study findings.  According to Table 2  the findings of the study showed that 15 of the  dashboards used were developed in 2020  and the rest were from 2021.  Fig. 2 shows the activity level of Covid 19 dashboards  which were  mostly related to national dashboards  68  .  Other findings of the study showed that most of the studies were in  the United States  4 studies   Canada  3 studies   Iran  and Spain  each  with two studies .  Eleven studies  57.90   were developmental  and eight  42.10    were descriptive studies.  All dashboards related to data visualization have been done using  graphs and geographical maps  and in many dashboards related to  increasing the quality and accuracy of data presentation  a chart has  been provided for each index  29 .  According to Fig. 3  the data sources of Covid 19 dashboards are  divided into five main categories. Hospital data sources include labo  ratory information  28  and electronic health records  21 .  According to Fig. 3  the most important data source for the studied  dashboards is public online databases  national and international    31.58  . In one case  depending on the type of dashboard  the Table 1  Resource search strategy.   Time  limitation 2020   present  language Full text in English   1  Dashboard    OR  interactive dashboard   OR  control panel   OR   indicator panel     2  COVID 19   OR  Covid   OR  SARS COV 2   OR  corona virus    Strategy  1 AND  2  A. Vahedi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100910 3dashboard data source was the RCT registries of different countries  31 .  Although within all dashboards  the issue of monitoring the  emerging disease of Covid 19 has been considered by designers and  system manufacturers  but according to Fig. 4  the main topics of  dashboard development fall into five main categories.  According to Table 3  the key indicators of the studied dashboards  are divided into five categories  which also show the definition of the  indicators of each category and the purpose of using the indicators.  According to Table 3  each item in the indictor definition column has  several indicators and calculation methods that their details are not  discussed in the articles and are not included in the study objectives.  Other results of the study showed that the most used software for the  development of dashboards was the use of the R language and the use of  the Shiny capability  and the most important software for receiving data  was Excel software.  8.Discussion  After the widespread spread of Covid 19 worldwide  various strate   gies were adopted to deal with it  and various sciences were used for this  purpose. Undoubtedly  information technology is one of the most  advanced sciences for dealing effectively with Covid 19  5 . One of the  most effective IT based solutions that were quickly used by many  countries globally was the development and use of different types of  dashboards  18 20 . The present study results showed that most of the  studied dashboards were created in the first months of the outbreak in  the design countries. The use of information dashboards at the beginning  of the outbreak plays an important role in empowering managers and  officials at different levels of management to make appropriate and  effective decisions and encourages managers to make evidence based  decisions. It is suggested that further studies be conducted on the  design of dashboards and dashboard manufacturing tools to provide a  basis for further development of these tools for possible future epidemic and pandemic conditions.  COVID 19 dashboards updated the information during this pandemic  by providing disease related information to the general public and  raising awareness of the prevalence. They were introduced as a tool to  tackle COVID 19  4 6 . Another point that can be mentioned as the role  of the dashboard in the face of COVID 19 is to help track infected areas  and report the disease prevalence to different level managers and  policy makers using different tables and graphs. These user friendly  tables and graphs can be used to evidence based decide to deal effec  tively with Covid 19  19 21  quickly. For this reason  it should pay  attention to all the technical and content aspects of the dashboard so  that these features can be fully used.  Another part of the study indicates that most of the dashboards  studied are national  and the rest are local  hospital  multi hospital  or in  a specific area  or international. Due to their nature  national dash  boards can be effective in managerial and health aspects  31 . Its various  users can obtain their information at the national level and specific re  gions. International dashboards also work to monitor the status of the  disease at the international level and use public databases  and provide  valuable information to officials in those countries and regions where  dashboard development is not possible. It seems that the development of  dashboards at all three levels is regional  national  and international   and each of them has its nature and tasks.  Visualization and proper reporting of data and information in in  formation technology tools  41  and especially dashboards are among  the aspects emphasized in their design and evaluation  42 . The results  of the study of Covid 19 dashboards indicate that in the design of these  dashboards  special attention is paid to the visualization of data and in  addition to selecting and using different graphs according to the nature  of the disease from geographical maps to show disease distribution and  indicators A related key is also used  In addition to meeting the needs of  managers and policymakers to be responsive to the general public.  Other findings from the study show that online public databases are  Fig. 1.The process of selecting related articles.  A. Vahedi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100910 4Table 2  Characteristics of included studies.   Item First  author Year of  publish Country Software used interactivity Main purpose Results  1 Obda  25  2021 Spain Matlab  LHM algorithm    Monitoring information about  hospital beds to manage beds Using the management dashboard  improves the management of hospital  beds in different disease peaks  2 Godari   26  2020 Iran QlikView  Excel   Management dashboard design In the diagnostic dashboard   epidemiological background  clinical  signs  chest CT images  laboratory  diagnosis  and the monitoring  dashboard  statistics related to  patients  age  gender  and time of their  infection were determined as  functional indicators.  3 Wissel   27  2020 United  states     Develop a registry to deal with  emergencies Collect up to date data from various  sources and use it in dashboards to  help monitor data to predict future  epidemics and pandemics  4 Dixit  19  2020 United  states Tablea  Excel   The rapid development of a  dashboard to raise awareness of  mobile health usage status in covid   19 in a multi hospital healthcare  system A dashboard was designed with high  visualization capabilities based on  user needs. Special purpose  dashboards were designed to meet the  needs of users.  5 Maury   28  2021 Swiss R Shiny  Excel   Assist in managing the performance  of diagnostic laboratories Key indicators were divided into five  categories   1  General and gender related  indicators  2  Number of tests  3   Cycle threshold and viral load  4   Duration of the test  and 5  Invalid  results  6 Beltr  an     29  2021 Spain R Shiny   Its main purpose was to facilitate  visualization  interpretability  and  comparison in different data  directions with different natures  according to different times and  places. Interdisciplinary dashboard  area  sensitive  history sensitive  flexible   downloadable  and easy to use  7 Yie  30  2021 Taiwan Google map  Excel   The purpose of the dashboard design  was to help complete the study   which was designed to analyze social  networks to identify patterns of  spatial temporal dispersion during  the Covid 19 outbreak. This dashboard has been created for  the geographical representation of  different regions with the help of  Google Map and shows the clusters  created by regions.  8 Thorlund   31  2020 Canada     Designed to centralize and enable up   to date and timely analysis Uses artificial intelligence to collect  clinical data of clinical trials  performed in the field of Covid 19  worldwide  9 Florez   20  2020  Download data from Excel files  for development from PHP and  JavaScript   To assess the incidence and mortality  of Covid 19 Mathematical models are proposed for  predicting morbidity and mortality in  different countries  10 Maghdid   32  2020 Iraq HTML5  PHP  JAVAScript  and  google Map API   To provide plans to policymakers to  implement quarantine to be effective  in these economic conditions. The  dashboard has been compiled to  predict the level of quarantine areas  based on location and distance data. This dashboard was designed as a  basis for the main purpose of the  study  which was to monitor and track  patients.  11 Arora   33  2021 Canada     A dashboard that systematically  monitors and analyzes global findings  from Covid 19 serological studies. This dashboard provides a  comparative world map of studies  conducted in different study groups  and regions. Furthermore  does the  work in a systematic live search and  searches the Medline  Embase  Web of  Science  and Cochrane databases.  12 Marvel   34  2020 United  states     Visualize key vulnerability  Stimulants  historical trend data  and  quantitative forecasts to support local  decision making Epidemiological modeling and  machine learning predictions have  been used in dashboard development.  13 Ibrahim   21  2020 United  Arabic  Emirates Microsoft Power BI and Cerner  Computer Language  CCL    Development and use of clinical  intelligent dashboards for front line  physicians to optimize vital resources  during Covid 19 The dashboard enables physicians to  effectively assess patient size and  severity to prioritize clinical care and  allocate scarce resources  appropriately. The dashboard can be  replicated by developing health care  systems that continue to struggle with  the epidemic.  Receives 55 fields of information from  the EHR   continued on next page  A. Vahedi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100910 5the most important data source for Covid 19 dashboards. Due to the  large amount of data generated and easy access to these data sources   many national and international dashboards were developed to help  control the epidemic. One of the data sources used in two dashboards is  news and media data. It is suggested that these reliable  free and  available data sources be used more to develop dashboards in the field of  pandemics and epidemics. Possible future  because it will provide more  accurate information about the state of society at the time of the  outbreak of the disease.  Although disease monitoring is a major issue and the main goal of the  development of Covid 19 dashboards  other issues that were considered  in the development of dashboards were diagnosis and monitoring   resource management at the hospital level and other higher levels of  service  monitoring studies conducted in the field of Covid 19 nationally and internationally and public and private information. Paying attention  to the subject of studies conducted and ongoing by covid 19 in research  dashboards can provide relevant and practical information to re  searchers and policymakers.  The most important part of the development of dashboards is iden  tifying and selecting performance key indicators  41 . Findings of the  study showed that the performance key indicators of Covid 19 dash  boards include indicators related to hospital beds  epidemiological data  in the hospital  information of patients referred to the hospital due to  Covid 19   diagnostic and therapeutic measures of hospitals  general  epidemiological data  statistics beyond a hospital or diagnostic and  treatment center  and indicators of studies conducted in the field of  Covid 19 worldwide. Appropriate management can be applied to hos  pital beds in different wards using the indicators related to hospital beds. Table 2  continued    Item First  author Year of  publish Country Software used interactivity Main purpose Results  The color coding pattern is used.  Username and password are defined  for individuals  14 Wimba   35  2020 Congo R software   Monitoring preventive measures in  response to the outbreak of COVID 19  in the Democratic Republic of the  Congo They have real time access to data  that helps fight the epidemic. The  findings of this pilot study called for  rapid public awareness measures to  support national media based  prevention campaigns.  15 Lin  36  2020 Canada Shiny   Monitoring the prevalence of Covid   19 in Canada It allows users to monitor the  prevalence of the disease by looking at  the data  16 Pellert   37  2020 Austria API  web scraping to retrieve  the data   Develop a dashboard that displays  processed data from three different  sources to track emotions on Austrian  social media during COVID 19. Combined methods and experiences  of other dashboards have been used to  develop this dashboard.  17 Wise  38  2020 England     Provide data and information online  and promptly to researchers and  other stakeholders Tasks This dashboard detects  tests   tracks  isolates  and supports   and  identifies areas that need more data.  This dashboard provides key metrics  using charts and bar charts and is  constantly updated  and allows users  to access regional data.  18 Salehi   39  2020 Iran R Shiny   It introduces a useful online  interactive dashboard that visualizes  and tracks Covid 19 verifications in  real time. Provides an online statistical program   which aims to make reasoning a large  amount of data collected during the  COVID 19 epidemic for academic and  general consumers.  Reasoning large amounts of data  19 Al Jazairi   40  2020 Saudi  Arabia For web publishing  common  standards such as HTML  CSS   and JavaScript  Oracle  Corporation   JSON  Bootstrap   JQuery  Chart.js  and Data  Tables   Determining the performance of the  Pulmonary Drug Care Dashboard  during the Covid 19 era in a complex  healthcare environment Creating a dynamic and semi realistic  pharmacy dashboard in unstable  conditions such as those that arose  during the COVID 19 epidemic can be  very helpful in managing the  outpatient pharmacy workload.   Fig. 2.Activity level of Covid 19 dashboards.    Fig. 3.Data sources for COVID 19 dashboards.  A. Vahedi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100910 6Patients in need of hospitalization should be directed to hospitals with  empty capacity to finally avoid the crowding of waiting patients and  thus reduce the waiting time. The report of indicators related to epide   miological data and indicators related to diagnostic and therapeutic  measures can indicate the performance of hospitals and other service  centers in the face of the disease  whether at the level of one hospital or  several hospitals  provincial  regional  and country  to be used  21 26 .  The study results showed that in the hospital dashboards of Covid 19   the mentioned indicators could be effective in the appropriate man  agement and allocation of resources. It is recommended to develop dashboards despite the data generated in hospitals and other care cen  ters such as laboratories.  Our study showed that the general epidemiological indicators are the  widest category of indicators of Covid 19 dashboards. One of the notable  findings of the study is the presentation of indicators in the field of  studies conducted or ongoing in the field of Covid 19 worldwide  which  focus on RCT and serological studies  31 . The use of these indicators  provides valuable information to researchers.  The choice of health software development technology will be one of  the success factors of these systems  42   in the present study  the most  important software for the development and visualization of Covid 19 is  R language and Shiny dashboard design software. However  Python   MATLAB  QlikView  and Tablea software were also used. Due to the  nature of the R programming language in visualizing data and the high  capabilities of Shiny  the use of these tools to design dashboards is  recommended.  9.Conclusion  The results of the study showed that the most important applications  of Covid 19 dashboards are their use for managing hospital beds to  allocate them to patients in priority and need of hospitalization  moni   toring the community based on epidemiological data for macro de  cisions at the national level and regional  review of the performance of  hospitals and the number of services provided to allocate resources  commensurate with their performance and monitoring of recent scien   tific studies and findings in this field. One of the most important features  of the studied dashboards was focusing on the national level and  interacting with information resources and other similar dashboards.  The main topics of interest for the designers of Covid 19 dashboards  included diagnosis and monitoring  resource management  monitoring  studies  disease monitoring in the community  and information at  various specialized and general levels.  Considering the study results and the role of dashboards in tracking  the prevalence of the disease in different communities and regions  it is  suggested to use this program more widely in the field of tracking the  disease and similar epidemic and pandemic situations. Given that the  present study has examined all the important aspects of Covid 19  dashboards over a year of its prevalence  the results of the study can  be used to upgrade existing Covid 19 dashboards and develop new  dashboards in the field of epidemics and possible future pandemics to be  used by policymakers and designers of Covid 19 dashboards.  Ethical approval  IR.SBMU.RETECH.REC.1399.1162.  Funding  This study was extracted from a Ph.D. thesis approved by the Ethics  Committee of Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences.  Guarantor  Farkhondeh Asadi.  Author contributions  A.V and F.A conception and design of the study  A.V and A.H  acquisition of data  A.V and H.M analysis and interpretation of data  A.  V  A.N and F.A drafting the article and revising it critically for important  intellectual content  A.H  H.M and F.A final approval of the submitted  version.  Fig. 4.The main topic in the design of dashboards.   Table 3  Indicators used in Covid 19 dashboards.   Item The main category of  indicators Definition Purpose of indicators  1 Indicators related to  hospital beds Hospital beds based on  peaks  as an amount  and percentage   bed  occupancy status in  normal and special  wards Management of  hospital beds at the  hospital and district  level  2 Indicators of  epidemiological data  in the hospital Incidence and mortality  Indicators  based on the  identity information of  the recovered in the  hospital and by wards    as a percentage  Monitoring the  disease status in  hospitals for hospital  management and  reporting to higher  authorities  3 Indicators related to  diagnostic and  therapeutic measures  of hospitals Indicators such as  diagnostic measures   including laboratory  measures  number of  tests  test results   positive  negative   suspicious  etc.   results  of measures  treatment  measures  such as  telehealth  Status of measures  taken in hospitals to  combat Covid 19  4 Indicators of general  epidemiological data Indicators such as  morbidity and  mortality at the  community level   recoveries  disease  trends  demographic  indicators  population  concentration  infection  rate  health  and  environmental  vulnerabilities  travel  history  time trend  care  information provided Monitoring the  disease status at the  community level  5 Indicators of studies  conducted in the field  of Covid 19  worldwide Indicators related to the  subject of studies  the  spatial distribution of  studies Monitoring Covid 19  studies worldwide  A. Vahedi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100910 7Declaration of competing interest  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial  interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence  the work reported in this paper.  Acknowledgements  This study was extracted from a Ph.D. thesis approved by the Ethics  Committee of Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences  IR.SBMU.  RETECH.REC.1399.1162 .  References   1 Shi F  Wang J  Shi J  Wu Z  Wang Q  Tang Z  et al. Review of artificial intelligence  techniques in imaging data acquisition  segmentation  and diagnosis for COVID 19.  IEEE Rev Biomed Eng 2020 14 4  15.   2 Ghasemizad A  Gholtash A. Explanation of a process based model for crisis  medicine  a qualitative study. EBNESINA 2019 21 3  4  11.   3 Ashrafi Rizi H  Kazaempour Z. The challenges of information service related to the  COVID 19 crisis. J Mil Med 2020 22 2  207  9.   4 Dong E  Du H  Gardner L. An interactive web based dashboard to track COVID 19  in real time. Lancet Infect Dis 2020 20 5  533  4.   5 Ghaderzadeh M  Asadi F. Deep learning in the detection and diagnosis of COVID 19  using radiology modalities  a systematic review. J Healthc Eng 2021 Mar 15 2021 .   6 Wang CJ  Ng CY  Brook RH. Response to COVID 19 in Taiwan  big data analytics   new technology  and proactive testing. JAMA 2020 323 14  1341  2.   7 Zhou C  Su F  Pei T  Zhang A  Du Y  Luo B  et al. COVID 19  challenges to GIS with  big data. Geogr Sustain 2020 1 1  77  87.   8 Cohen JP  Morrison P  Dao L  Roth K  Duong TQ  Ghassemi M. Covid 19 image data  collection  prospective predictions are the future. 2020. arXiv preprint arXiv   200611988 .   9 Kraemer MU  Yang C H  Gutierrez B  Wu C H  Klein B  Pigott DM  et al. The effect  of human mobility and control measures on the COVID 19 epidemic in China.  Science 2020 368 6490  493  7.   10  Muhareb R  Giacaman R. Tracking COVID 19 responsibly. Lancet 2020 .   11  Roser M  Ritchie H  Ortiz Ospina E  Hasell J. Coronavirus disease  COVID 19     Statistics and research  4. Our World in data  2020 .   12  Requirements for a quality dashboard  lessons from national clinical audits. In   Randell R  Alvarado N  McVey L  Ruddle RA  Doherty P  Gale C  et al.  editors.  AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings. American Medical Informatics Association   2019 .   13  Quality Dashboards  technical and architectural considerations of an actionable  reporting tool for population management. In  Olsha Yehiav M  Einbinder JS   Jung E  Linder JA  Greim J  Li Q  et al.  editors. AMIA Annual Symposium  Proceedings. American Medical Informatics Association  2006 .   14  Baldwin G. Dashboards in action. Health Data Manag 2011 19 10 . 34  6  8   6  8.   15  Dolan JG  Veazie PJ  Russ AJ. Development and initial evaluation of a treatment  decision dashboard. BMC Med Inf Decis Making 2013 13 1  1  9.   16  Plerhoples T  Morton J. Creating a surgical dashboard for quality. The SAGES  manual of quality  outcomes and patient safety. Springer  2012. p. 25 33.   17  Carroll C  Flucke N  Barton AJ. The use of dashboards to monitor quality of care.  Clin Nurse Spec 2013 27 2  61  2.   18  Ivankovi  c D  Barbazza E  Bos V  Fernandes  OB  Gilmore KJ  Jansen T  et al.  Features constituting actionable COVID 19 dashboards  descriptive assessment and  expert appraisal of 158 public web based COVID 19 dashboards. J Med Internet  Res 2021 23 2  e25682 .   19  Dixit RA  Hurst S  Adams KT  Boxley C  Lysen Hendershot K  Bennett SS  et al.  Rapid development of visualization dashboards to enhance situation awareness of  COVID 19 telehealth initiatives at a multihospital healthcare system. J Am Med Inf  Assoc 2020 27 9  1456  61.   20  Florez H  Singh S. Online dashboard and data analysis approach for assessing  COVID 19 case and death data. F1000Res 2020 9 .  21  Ibrahim H  Sorrell S  Nair SC  Al Romaithi A  Al Mazrouei S  Kamour A. Rapid  development and utilization of a clinical intelligence dashboard for frontline  clinicians to optimize critical resources during COVID 19. Acta Inf Med 2020 28   3  209 .   22  Page MJ  McKenzie JE  Bossuyt PM  Boutron I  Hoffmann TC  Mulrow CD  et al.  The PRISMA 2020 statement  an updated guideline for reporting systematic  reviews. Bmj 2021 372 .   23  Lo CK  Mertz D  Loeb M. Newcastle Ottawa Scale  comparing reviewers   to authors    assessments. BMC Med Res Methodol 2014 14 1  1  5.   24  Garavand A  Rabiei R  Emami H  Pishgahi M  Vahidi Asl M. The attributes of  hospital based coronary artery diseases registries with a focus on key registry  processes  a systematic review. Health Inform Manag J 2020 Jul 17.  1833358320929366 .   25  S anchez  beda EF  S anchez Mart n P  Torrego Ellacur a M  Rey Mej as  AD   Morales Contreras MF. Puerta J L. Flexibility and bed margins of the community of  madrid  s hospitals during the first wave of the SARS CoV 2 pandemic. Int J  Environ Res Publ Health 2021 18 7  3510 .   26  Khajeh Goodari S  Rahdar MA. Designing a management dashboard for healthcare  professionals and managers in the COVID 19 epidemic. J Mil Med 2020 22 10    1013  24.   27  Wissel BD  Van Camp P  Kouril M  Weis C  Glauser TA  White PS  et al. An  interactive online dashboard for tracking COVID 19 in US counties  cities  and  states in real time. J Am Med Inf Assoc 2020 27 7  1121  5.   28  Maury E  Boldi M O  Greub G  Chavez V  Jaton K  Opota O. An automated  Dashboard to improve laboratory COVID 19 diagnostics management. medRxiv   2021 .   29  Beltr  an ETM  P erez MQ  Pastor Galindo J  Nespoli P  Clemente FJG  M armol FG.  COnVIDa  COVID 19 multidisciplinary data collection and dashboard. J Biomed Inf  2021 117 103760 .   30  Yie K Y  Chien T W  Yeh Y T  Chou W  Su S B. Using social network analysis to  identify spatiotemporal spread patterns of COVID 19 around the world  online  dashboard development. Int J Environ Res Publ Health 2021 18 5  2461 .   31  Thorlund K  Dron L  Park J  Hsu G  Forrest JI  Mills EJ. A real time dashboard of  clinical trials for COVID 19. Lancet Digit Health 2020 2 6  e286  7.   32  Maghdid HS  Ghafoor KZ. A smartphone enabled approach to manage COVID 19  lockdown and economic crisis. SN Comput Sci 2020 1 5  271 .   33  Arora RK  Joseph A  Van Wyk J  Rocco S  Atmaja A  May E  et al. SeroTracker  a  global SARS CoV 2 seroprevalence dashboard. Lancet Infect Dis 2021 21 4  e75  6.   34  Marvel SW  House JS  Wheeler M  Song K  Zhou YH  Wright FA  et al. The COVID   19 pandemic vulnerability index  PVI  dashboard  monitoring county level  vulnerability using visualization  statistical modeling  and machine learning.  Environ Health Perspect 2021 129 1  17701 .   35  Wimba PM  Bazeboso J A  Katchunga PB  Tshilolo L  Longo Mbenza B   Rabilloud M  et al. A dashboard for monitoring preventive measures in response to  COVID 19 outbreak in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Trop Med Health 2020   48 1  74 .   36  Lin M  Beliavsky A  Katz K  Powis JE  Ng W  Williams V  et al. What can early  Canadian experience screening for COVID 19 teach us about how to prepare for a  pandemic  Cmaj 2020 192 12 . E314 e8 .   37  Pellert M  Lasser J  Metzler H  Garcia D. Dashboard of sentiment in Austrian social  media during COVID 19. Front Big Data 2020 3 32 .   38  Wise J. Covid 19  official data on England are patchy  say researchers behind new  evaluation dashboard. BMJ 2020 371 m4178 .   39  Salehi M  Arashi M  Bekker A  Ferreira J  Chen D G  Esmaeili F  et al. A synergetic  R shiny portal for modeling and tracking of COVID 19 data. Front Public Health  2021 8 1042  .   40  Al Jazairi AS  Horanieh BK  Alswailem OA. The usefulness of an ambulatory care  pharmacy performance dashboard during the COVID 19 pandemic in a complex  tertiary care system. Am J Health Syst Pharm 2021 78 9  813  7.   41  Ghazisaeidi M  Safdari R  Torabi M  Mirzaee M  Farzi J  Goodini A. Development of  performance dashboards in healthcare sector  key practical issues. Acta Inf Med  2015 Oct 23 5  317 .   42  Almasi S  Rabiei R  Moghaddasi H  Vahidi Asl M. Emergency department quality  dashboard  a systematic review of performance indicators  functionalities  and  challenges. Arch Acad Emerg Med 2021 9 1 . e47 e . A. Vahedi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

