Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100920 Available online 24 March 2022 2352 9148   2022 The Author s . Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY NC ND license   http   creativecommons.org licenses by  nc nd 4.0   .Potential senotherapeutic candidates and their combinations derived from  transcriptional connectivity and network measures  Amirhossein Nayeri Rada 1  Golnaz Shamsa 1  Roberto A. Avelarb  Mohammad  Hossein Morowvata    Younes Ghasemia c  aPharmaceutical Sciences Research Center  Shiraz University of Medical Sciences  P.O. Box 71468 64685  Shiraz  Iran  bIntegrative Genomics of Ageing Group  Institute of Life Course and Medical Sciences  University of Liverpool  Liverpool  UK  cDepartment of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology  School of Pharmacy  Shiraz University of Medical Sciences  P.O. Box 71468 64685  Shiraz  Iran    ARTICLE INFO   Keywords   Senescence  Combination therapy  Connectivity Map  Network proximity  Aging ABSTRACT   Cellular senescence  a state of permanent cell cycle arrest  is associated with organismal aging and malfunc   tioning. Various attempts have been made to find a unified gene signature for all senescence models in every cell  type. However  with more studies being conducted  none look to be universally shared  instead  it seems that the  senescence gene signature is cell type specific. In the present study  74 genes commonly expressed in different  models of fibroblast senescence  derived from two independent studies were extracted. The shared signature of  fibroblast senescence  which was functionally associated with aging  was further regarded as a target module to  attenuate the fibroblast senescence phenotype. Utilizing Connectivity Map to discover the inversely connected  compounds with this gene signature and analyzing network proximity of the targets of the inversely connected  compounds with fibroblast senescence genes  we suggest glutamine  tangeretin  artemisinin  and castano   spermine as potential senescence therapeutics. Moreover  to overcome this impaired gene expression system  we  suggest the combination of glutamine with one of tangeretin  artemisinin  or castanospermine  that obey the  complementary exposure pattern to reach better therapeutic efficacy while manifesting minimal adverse effects.    1.Introduction  Aging is a complex biological process  one of the key contributors to  aging is cellular senescence  1 . Cellular senescence was first described  by Hayflick and Moorhead as a process that limited human cell prolif   eration following prolonged cultivation in culture  2 . It is now  described as a process of permanent growth arrest in response to various  stressors. Cellular senescence has an important role in a broad range of  beneficial and detrimental physiological and pathological conditions   from tumor suppression to embryonic development and organismal  aging  3 . These conditions are regulated by networks of multiple  cellular pathways which have not been clearly identified yet. That is the  reason why senescence is considered a highly networked system that is  difficult to target  4 .  Pharmacological interventions targeting senescent cells are mainly  categorized as senomorphics and senolytics. Senomorphics are com  pounds that suppress markers of senescence or inhibit the detrimental  effects of senescent cells by affecting the senescence associated secretory phenotype  SASP   5   examples of such compounds include  rapamycin  4 6   metformin  7 9   and ruxolitinib  10 . Senolytics  on  the other hand  are compounds that selectively eliminate senescent cells   including navitoclax  11 12   piperlongumine  13   and some natural  flavonoids like fisetin  14  and quercetin alone or in combination with  dasatinib  15 16 . The concept of combination therapy has been raised  to better affect the disease systems  17  and has been a successful  strategy in the treatment of multiple diseases with the goal of increasing  efficacy  reducing adverse effects  or both  18 . Combination therapy  has also been reported to be effective in eliminating senescent cells  for  example  using quercetin plus dasatinib or piperlongumine in combi   nation with ABT 263 was more advantageous than monotherapy  13   19 . However  the identification of effective drug combinations is mostly  an experimentally long process with a high failure rate. Thus  there is a  need for novel drug combination design strategies  20 .  Expansion of bioinformatics databases and tools have made thera   peutics discovery easier than ever. Employing these bioinformatics tools  using different methodologies and databases to identify and prioritize   Corresponding author.  E mail address  mhmorowvat sums.ac.ir  M.H. Morowvat .    1 ANR and GS contributed as co first authors.  Contents lists available at ScienceDirect  Informatics in Medicine Unlocked  u   zkw  s yo kr o     1ow  o to 1m y2w m k o2ty   https   doi.org 10.1016 j.imu.2022.100920  Received 5 March 2022  Received in revised form 14 March 2022  Accepted 15 March 2022   

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100920 2pro longevity drugs has gained a lot of interest recently  21 . In one  study  Fuentealba et al. established association of targets of each drug  with aging at multiple levels of biological action  including pathways   functions  and protein interactions. By combining all the data  they  identified tanespimycin  an inhibitor of HSP 90  as the top ranked novel  anti aging candidate  22 . In another study  Aliper et al. used Gero  Scope  a signaling pathway activation based algorithm  to screen and  rank known substances based on their predicted ability to mimic the  signalome of young  vs old  human donors. They suggested PD 98059  a  highly selective MEK1 inhibitor  as the top geroprotector among ten  selected substances  23 . All such studies have been enabled by the  availability of extensively compiled and curated databases. Although  many of these databases primarily focused on cancer cell lines  extrap   olation of these data to normal cells applying some transformation may  be worthwhile. The Library of Integrated Network Based Cellular Sig  natures  LINCS  project has catalogued changes in gene expression and  other cellular processes that occur when cells are exposed to a variety of  perturbing agents. Transcriptional data of many small molecule per  turbations on different cell types are available through its data portal   24 . The Connectivity Map  CMap  of these perturbations  which rank  perturbations based on their transcriptional similarity  has been made  available through the CLUE platform  25 . This large database now acts  as a great source for new drug discoveries relevant to a variety of dis  eases  26 31 . Connectivity Map is now being utilized in aging studies   too. For example  D onertas   et al. compiled a signature that characterizes  aging through a meta analysis of brain tissue gene expression datasets of  patients of different ages. They queried the CMap database and found 24  drugs significantly associated with the aging signature  32 . Calvert  et al.  also employed CMap to identify drugs with overlapping gene  expression profiles with caloric restriction  CR . Among the compounds  predicted as CR mimetics  rapamycin  allantoin  trichostatin A  and  LY 294002 were identified as the compounds that result in both lifespan  and healthspan extension in the same manner as CR  33 .  Moreover  network characterization and analysis tools are widely  employed in systems pharmacology approaches to discover or repurpose  drugs for incurable diseases or even to uncover a drug  s mechanism of  action  and most recently to find suitable combination therapies  18 34   35 .  It is observed that the transcriptome of senescent cells is highly  dependent on the cell and stress type. There has been a lot of effort put  towards reaching a universal gene signature that drives senescence in all  different cell types via different stressors. We focused on two prominent  studies of this kind. Casella et al.  by inducing senescence through  different methodologies in endothelial and fibroblast cells  suggested 68  genes as the shared transcriptome profiles of senescence  36 . In the  other study  Hernandez Segura et al. identified 1311 genes as the  senescence signature in fibroblasts independent of stimulus  alongside  55 universal senescence genes shared with other cell types  melano   cytes  keratinocytes  astrocytes   37 . Comparing these 55 genes with  the Casella  s 68 genes  just one gene  POFUT2  was shared. Given the  lack of a universal senescence signature shared across various cell types   the current investigation focused on the fibroblast signature of senes   cence from these two studies.  In this study we identify core genes contributing to fibroblast  senescence and use small molecule CMap together with network tools to  predict new senotherapeutics of natural origin  we focus on natural  products as they encompass a diverse range of biological impacts and  can be discovered as drug leads  38 . Finally  we suggest a principled  combination therapy for fibroblast senescence.  2.Methods  2.1. Bioinformatics pipeline  Shared signature of fibroblast senescence was gained through over  lapping signatures of fibroblast senescence between datasets of different fibroblast senescence models in the study of Casella et al. and fibroblast  senescence signature adopted from the study of Hernandez Segura  which was derived through a meta analysis of different datasets of  fibroblast senescence. Then the shared signature was used to query  CMap. Transcriptionally connected perturbations were sorted and  selected by a ranking method which we called mean squared distance   MSD  scoring. Protein targets of the compounds ranked above a specific  threshold were obtained from different databases and their proximity  with the fibroblast signature of senescence was assessed in the context of  the human protein protein interaction  PPI  network. For final ranking   the proximity and transcriptional scores were combined using z score  summation. To analyze the complementary exposure pattern  network  module separation scores of pairs of drugs were calculated  the whole  workflow has been depicted in the graphical abstract .  2.2. Consensus senescent fibroblast gene signature  By overlapping differentially expressed genes of all senescent fibro  blast models of Casella et al. s study  329 genes were extracted  seven  supplementary datasets of WI 38 and IMR 90 were available .  Benjamini Hochberg adjusted p value  false discovery rate  FDR   D 0.15 was set for differentially expressed genes  as stated in the article.  The overlapping was performed between upregulated and down   regulated genes  distinctly. In the next step  the overlap of the 1311  senescent fibroblast genes proposed by Hernandez Segura et al.  with  the 329 genes of Casella  s study was evaluated by one tailed Fisher  s  exact test with Benjamini Hochberg FDR correction using all protein   coding genes as the background. To do so  both gene lists were  filtered for protein coding genes so that all protein coding genes could  be used as the background. Since most of the genes in the list were  protein coding  this was more stringent than including non coding  genes. Overlapping of the genes was done by direction  i.e.  over  lapping the Hernandez Segura  s overexpressed genes with both Case  lla s overexpressed and underexpressed genes  and then repeating with  Hernandez Segura  s underexpressed genes.  2.3. Enrichment analysis  Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes  KEGG  pathways and  Gene Ontology  GO  enrichment was performed using the clusterProfiler  R package  version 3.18.1   accessed July 20  2021   39 . The genes  were converted to Entrez IDs using the biomaRt R package  Ensembl  100  package version 2.46.3   40 41 . The intersect of differentially  expressed genes shared between studies of Hernandez Segura et al. and  Casella et al. was enriched using two distinct backgrounds  1  all  protein coding genes and 2  senescence signatures from all cell types   gathered from the study of Hernandez Segura et al. For both back  grounds  the enrichment was performed by taking the direction of  expression into account. Significance was assessed using a hypergeo   metric test with Benjamini Hochberg FDR correction.  2.4. Compound selection  Upregulated and downregulated protein coding genes were  distinctly submitted to the CLUE query app  Dataset S1 . The connec   tivity map which includes all similar and dissimilar perturbations  deposited in the LINCS L1000 database  https   lincsproject.org    were  given with their normalized connectivity scores  throughout the text we  simply call it the connectivity score   25 . In order to select the com  pounds with natural origin  Dr. Duke  s phytochemical and ethnobo   tanical databases was used  42 . Taking into account that each  compound perturbation might have been developed with various  experimental variables including perturbed cells or perturbation con  centrations  two filtration criteria were employed to restrict the com  pounds with the highest probability of being a senescence attenuator.  Firstly  each compound had to have at least four different recorded A. Nayeri Rad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100920 3perturbations  e.g.  on different cell lines or different concentrations .  Secondly  the MSD of the connectivity scores from  2  manually set and  is less than minimum global score  of each compound in its different  perturbations had to be less than 3  Eq.  1  .  MSD 1 N N i 1 xi a 2 Eq.1    where  N  is the number of perturbations each compound has.  xi is the  connectivity score of each perturbation related to compound  x   and   a  as mentioned is a fixed value manually set at  2. While the method  of measuring the normalized connectivity score  according to the  reference  25   does not lead to values settled in a specific range  we  used the hypothetical value of  2  which is less than the minimum  global connectivity score  as the lower range of the scores. We use the  MSD scores comparatively  hence  this hypothetical score does not affect  our interpretation of the ranking procedure. Furthermore  we scale the  MSD scores using z score standardization.  2.5. Target finding  The protein targets were manually pooled from CLUE Touchstone   Therapeutic Target Database  TTD   43   SwissTargetPrediction tool  with the target probability of more than 90   44   and ChEMBL  v28   bioactivity data  to obtain drug  target pairs  criteria of Ki  Kd  IC50 or  EC50 each  10  M had to be met   45 . The compound targets were  deduplicated afterward. Mygene python package was used to convert  gene symbols into their Entrez IDs  Dataset S2 .  2.6. Compound senescence network proximity analysis  Network proximity was measured by means of the  closest distance    between the set of drug targets and the set of genes associated with  senescence in the human protein interactome  Eq.  2    46 47 . The  human protein interactome was taken from a previous study containing  18 505 proteins  and 327 924 interactions between them  48 .   dST  1   S     T     s Smin t Td sCt    t Tmin s Sd sCt    Eq.2    where S is a set of senescence associated genes  T is a set of drug targets   and d s  t  is the shortest distance between gene s and t in the human  protein interactome. The network proximity was converted to a z score  based on permutation tests  Eq.  3     ZdST dST dr  r Eq.3    where dr and  r were the mean and standard deviation of the permu   tation test repeated 1000 times  each time with two randomly selected  gene lists with a similar degree of distributions to those of S and T.  2.7. Ranking compounds based on both proximity and MSD  Proximity z scores and MSD scores were both standardized using z   score standardization  and each compound  s standardized scores were  summed to obtain a final ranking score  Eq.  4  .  RS ZdST  p  p MSD  MSD  MSD Eq.4    where RS is the final ranking score obtained.  p and  MSD are each mean  of proximity z scores and MSD scores of the compounds with negative  proximity z scores. Additionally   p and  MSD are each the standard  deviation of z scores and MSD scores of the compounds with negative  proximity z scores. 2.8. Suggesting combination therapies through network module separation  In order to propose the best combination therapy to have the com  plementary exposure pattern between drug targets   modules  the  sep  aration   measure SAB was calculated for each pair of drugs A and B using  the following method  Eq.  5     SAB  dAB    dAA    dBB  2 Eq.5    where  d   was calculated based on the  closest   method.  2.9. Network visualization and graphical illustrations  Networks were visualized with Cytoscape  version 3.8.2   and Venn  diagrams were created using DeepVenn  49 .  3.Results  3.1. Consensus senescent fibroblast gene signature  To reach a senescence signature that is robustly universal in all fi  broblasts and is limited to fewer than 150 genes for each direction of  expression  the technical limit for querying CMap   the fibroblast  signature of senescence from Hernandez Segura et al. was used. This  signature was identified from a meta analysis of different datasets of  fibroblasts collected from the previous studies and their own experi   ments. The aforementioned fibroblast senescence signature was then  overlapped with 7 datasets that were selectively related to fibroblasts  from the study of Casella et al. The control groups in both Hernandez   Segura and Casella studies were proliferative cells  and the experi   mental groups were senescent cells induced through different models.  However  the genes differentially expressed in quiescent cells in com  parison to proliferative cells were excluded from the final fibroblast  senescence signature in the study of Hernandez Segura. Thus  the  overlapped genes would also be specific to senescence rather than  quiescence. The overlap between the genes from the Casella and  Hernandez Segura studies resulted in 47 shared upregulated genes  alongside 27 shared downregulated genes  all similarly differentially  expressed in all fibroblast senescence models combined. The shared  overlaps were significant for the relevant comparisons of up with up and  down with down  p D0.05   and not significant for the other combi   nations  p  1   which was as expected. We considered these shared  genes which were consistently differentially expressed regardless of the  method of senescence induction  as core genes of fibroblasts senescence  and used them in the rest of the study  Fig. 1 and Dataset S1 . The  resulted shared genes might not represent all the genes involved in the  senescence of fibroblasts but were suitable for our purpose to query the  CMap and reach outcomes based on reliable inputs.  3.2. Enrichment of core senescence genes  To find out the possible pathways  processes  and functions of the  shared genes of the fibroblast signatures of senescence  the genes were  enriched for KEGG pathways and GO terms using all protein coding  genes as an enrichment background. The overexpressed genes were  significantly overrepresented for the following biological processes    glycosaminoglycan metabolic process     aminoglycan metabolic pro  cess     glycoprotein biosynthetic process    and  mucopolysaccharide  metabolic process    n  5  5  6  and 4  respectively  p D0.05  hyper   geometric test with Benjamini Hochberg correction . Underexpressed  genes were also significantly overrepresented for the following biolog   ical processes   DNA demethylation     DNA dealkylation     tRNA cata  bolic process     demethylation     DNA methylation or demethylation      regulation of lymphocyte activation     oxidative demethylation      rRNA catabolic process    and  DNA modification    n  3  3  2  3  3  5  2  A. Nayeri Rad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100920 42  and 3  respectively  p D0.05  hypergeometric test with Benjamini   Hochberg correction . None of the overexpressed and underexpressed  genes was enriched in KEGG pathways.  Moreover  due to the lack of overlapping differentially expressed  genes amongst different senescent cell types  we asked whether the  differentially expressed genes in the shared fibroblast signatures of  senescence were involved in unique pathways or functions in compari   son to senescence signature in all cell types. To do so  the overexpressed  and underexpressed shared fibroblast senescence genes were enriched for unique KEGG pathways and GO terms  using signatures of senescence  from all cell types from the study of Hernandez Segura et al. as the  enrichment background. Accordingly  the biological process GO term of  the  carbohydrate derivative metabolic process   was significantly  enriched in overexpressed genes  n  14  p D0.01 . Furthermore  the   metabolic pathways   KEGG pathway was significantly enriched for the  overexpressed signature of fibroblast senescence  n  14  p D0.01   hypergeometric   Fig. 2  enrichment regardless of direction is available  in Fig. S1 .  Fig. 1.Venn diagrams of the overlapping upregulated and downregulated genes  each distinctly demonstrated. Shared genes that have been universally differentially  expressed in all fibroblast senescence models have been listed. A. Nayeri Rad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100920 53.3. Compound filtration based on transcriptional connectivity  Querying the core fibroblast senescence genes in CLUE  negatively  connected perturbations that were supposed to inverse senescence  signature could be potentially considered senescence therapeutics or  senomorphics. Among all compounds  304 natural compounds with  negative connectivity scores were extracted  Dataset S3 . Applying the  filters described in the  Methods   section  the number of potential  senescence therapeutics were reduced to 22  Dataset S4 . Acetamide  a  chemical solvent  was further excluded from this study. 3.4. Tightening compound filters regarding the network proximity of  compounds   targets with fibroblast senescence shared signature  As stated in the  Methods   section  the protein targets of the  remaining 21 compounds were pooled. Excluding compounds without  targets or with just one target  17 compounds remained. As the tran  scriptional effect of the perturbations of the filtered compounds were  derived from different cell types  none of which was primary fibroblast    it is possible that the transcriptional effects of these perturbations cannot  be extrapolated to fibroblast cells. Therefore  we analyzed network  proximity between the set of drug targets  which is not cell dependent   and the set of genes associated with fibroblast senescence. Drug targets  and senescence genes being proximal would further strengthen the  Fig. 2.Directional enrichment of the shared signature of fibroblast senescence for KEGG pathways and Gene Ontology  GO . No KEGG pathway or GO was enriched  for the underexpressed signature  using senescence signature of different cell types as the background. A. Nayeri Rad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100920 6notion that the resulted compounds have fibroblast senescence amelio   rative effects. Calculating the proximity of the target modules of the 17  compounds to the fibroblast senescence signature  Dataset S5  resulted  in 10 compounds with proximity z scores less than zero.  3.5. Ranking compounds based on both proximity and MSD  In order to take into account both the effect of proximity z scores and  MSD scores for ranking the compounds with more potential fibroblast  senomorphic effects  we standardized both scores using z score stan  dardization and summed each compound  s standardized scores. The  smaller the final ranked score  the more probably it was a fibroblast  senomorphic. Four compounds including glutamine  tangeretin  arte  misinin  and castanospermine showed negative final ranked scores   Table 1 . The protein protein interaction network of the targets of these  4 compounds with the proteins of the shared fibroblast senescence  signature has been visualized in Fig. 3.  3.6. Proposing combination therapy based on network separation criteria  The goal of drug combination therapy is to increase the efficacy of  therapy while reducing the side effects. In the complementary exposure  pattern that is proposed to avoid overlapping toxic mechanisms  one  drug targets   module has to be separated from the other  s module  18   47 .  Drug pairs are considered to have complementary effects when the  separation score  SAB  is more than zero. Among the 45 drug pair  combinations derived from the 10 proximal compounds identified in  Table 1  31 combinations showed SAB F0  Dataset S5 . We further  evaluated the separation scores of the pairs from the top 4 final ranked  compounds. Among the 6 combinations suggested  3 of the scores   derived from the combinations of artemisinin  tangeretin  and castano   spermine were less than zero  showing that their target network was not  separated. However  the combinations of glutamine with these 3 com  pounds had positive separation scores  which suggested that these drug combinations have a probable combinatorial therapeutic efficacy on  senescence without imposing higher toxic effects  Table 2  and Dataset  S5 .  4.Discussion  Senescence and its association with age related diseases is becoming  more apparent as research in this field progresses. Yet  no specific target  has been proposed for directly targeting these cells across all cell types  and tissues. This implies that senescence is a system regulated by various  components  50 . Therefore  in order to target senescence  its system  must be targeted. To date  transcriptomic data have helped scientists  better understand these systems  with different genes underlying spe  cific phenotypes. Finding the core gene signature of senescence may  reveal this system better and open the path for drug discovery. There  have been some attempts to find universal core genes in every cell type   but as stated in the  introduction   section  gene signatures derived from  independent studies do not robustly overlap. Focusing on just fibro  blasts  we showed that the core transcriptomics signature is probably  cell specific. By combining two studies that extensively worked on these  core genes  we extracted 74 common senescence related genes that were  significantly differentially expressed in various senescent fibroblast  models.  These shared genes of fibroblast senescence were analyzed for  functional enrichment. The genes in the  glycoprotein biosynthetic  process   were upregulated. It was previously shown that the pattern of  human salivary glycoproteins was associated with age  51 . In another  study  the authors raised the possibility of changes in the expression  level of glycoprotein molecules due to aging  52 . Moreover  the role of  glycosaminoglycans  formerly known as mucopolysaccharides  and  their metabolism have been widely discussed in skin aging where fi  broblasts are primarily present  53 . Furthermore  Yu et al. found that  hyperbaric normoxia treatment improved healthspan in flies. By  analyzing the gene expression of treated flies  the GO term of  amino   glycan metabolic process   was overrepresented in upregulated genes  Table 1  Scoring the compounds based on proximity and MSD. The compounds have been sorted based on their proximity z   scores. Negative z score sums have been highlighted in blue.  MSD  mean squared distance. A. Nayeri Rad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100920 7 54 . This opposes our finding that increased gene expression in this  biological process might correspond to fibroblast senescence followed  by organ aging. Thus  further investigations in this field are warranted.  Among the shared underexpressed signature  enrichment of the bio  logical process of  regulation of lymphocyte activation   has been re  ported to be linked to increased inflammatory responses related to aging   55 . In addition  the overrepresentation of underexpressed genes  involved in processes of DNA modification  demethylation  and deal  kylation  which are among repair cellular mechanisms  is in agreement  with impaired repair mechanisms in aging  56 57 . Zhou et al. reviewed  the role of tRNA metabolism in aging and lifespan  58 . In the current  research  downregulation of the genes enriched in tRNA catabolic pro  cesses was observed in the shared fibroblast senescence signature  which  might have possible connections with aging.  Besides biological processes  the  2 oxoglutarate dependent dioxy   genase activity   molecular function GO term was enriched. A recent study found that 2 oxoglutarate dependent dioxygenases are involved in  sensing energy metabolism  oxygen availability  and iron homeostasis   59 . Intriguingly  these processes have been linked to the aging process.  By changing the background of enrichment from all protein coding  genes to senescence signature of different cell types we found that the  metabolic process KEGG pathway and  carbohydrate derivative meta  bolic process   GO biological process were enriched for the overex   pressed signatures of fibroblast senescence compared to other  overexpressed senescence signatures from other cell types.  Carbohy   drate derivative metabolic process   biological process has also been  overrepresented in aging  60   which could indicate a functional  mechanism contributing to senescence in fibroblasts compared to other  cell types. CD44 and HYAL2 genes that are involved in this biological  process are responsible for the degradation of hyaluronan  one of the  major glycosaminoglycans of the extracellular matrix  ECM . The  increased catabolism of ECM hyaluronan by senescent fibroblasts is in  line with events in skin aging  61 .  Among the core fibroblast senescence genes  some have been pre  viously studied and have been shown to be associated with senescence  or to be causative of senescence. One of the main culprits of senescence  induction  listed in the present shared signature of fibroblast senescence   might be the downregulation of LBR. Herman et al. explained in their  study that the loss of lamin B receptor  LBR  induces cellular senescence  in WI 38 fibroblasts and derepresses heterochromatin in lamina   associated domains  promoting the expression of DNA repetitive ele  ments characteristic of senescence. They also disclosed that the over  expression of LBR partially reverses the senescent phenotype  62 .  Proteins coded by TET1 and TET2 are both epigenetic factors respon   sible for controlling gene expression. A previous study demonstrated  that TET1 knockdown in non small cell lung cancer cells induces cellular  senescence and genomic instability in p53 mutant cell lines. However   in cells including A549  which harbor unaffected wild type p53 while  depletion of neither TET1 nor p53 altered cell morphology   Fig. 3.Network of fibroblast senescence core protein coding genes interacting with the protein targets of highly ranked compounds  in the context of human  proteome network. Artemisinin  tangeretin and castanospermine have one overlapping gene. Each of the represented compounds has one established direct  connection with the core genes.  Table 2  Network separation scores  SAB  of the combinations of highly ranked com  pounds. Positive scores have been highlighted in blue.  A. Nayeri Rad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100920 8simultaneous knockdown of these genes confers the characteristic  senescence phenotype  63 . Five out of the seven datasets we used from  Casella s study showed significant downregulation of p53  these con  current downregulations of TET1 and p53 can be probable drivers of  senescence in the fibroblasts. This causative role has been seen for TET2  downregulation as well. Recently  it was demonstrated that  TET2 mutant human mesenchymal stem cells with significantly reduced  TET2 expression elevated cell senescence markers P16ink4a and SA   gal   64 . Accordingly  SOX11 expression was revealed to decrease as human  mesenchymal stem cells approach senescence via replicative exhaustion.  It was also shown that SOX11 knockdown attenuates mesenchymal stem  cell proliferation  65 . Therefore  in order to classify SOX11 among  genes with a causative role in senescence  further studies are needed to  be conducted.  Other genes in our shared senescence signature of fibroblasts that  had some evident associations with senescence in the literature were  CCND1  CD44 and APLP1. CCND1  which encodes a protein involved in  cell cycle progression  has been shown to be upregulated in fibroblast  senescence  66 . However  suppression of CCND1 cannot counteract  senescence  67 . The enhanced expression of CD44 in endothelial cells   68  and APLP1 in WI 38 cells is associated with senescence as well   which is dependent on p53 expression  69 .  After the functional evaluation of the shared genes that revealed  their linkage with aging or senescence  these commonly expressed genes  were regarded as the system shaping the universal characteristics of  senescence in fibroblasts and consecutively contributing to the aging of  tissues and organs where these cells are present  including connective  tissues of skin  70   lung  71   and heart  72 . We hypothesized that in  order to regulate this system in our favor  it is better to intervene from  two different points. Targeting one point may be ineffective if the system  has the capability of remodeling itself to maintain its senescent state  despite the intervention.  The model was designed around the analysis of transcriptional  connectivity between the compounds and the target signature  com  plemented with network topology by taking into account the distance  between network compartments. Among the 17 compounds selected to  be transcriptionally inversely connected to senescence and analyzed for  network proximity  10 compounds were proximal to the fibroblast  senescence gene signature. Considering the experimental bias sur  rounding PPI networks alongside the fact that not all compounds were  tested in fibroblast cell lines  our results are subject to change with  future discoveries  73 . For now  these 10 compounds are potential  senescence therapeutics  and we suggest future experimental fibroblast  senescence related studies  including skin aging  pulmonary fibrosis   and cardiac fibrosis  74 77 . We have ranked these 10 compounds  through z score summation based on both transcriptional connectedness  and network proximity scoring methodologies. The 4 outcome com  pounds of glutamine  tangeretin  artemisinin  and castanospermine are  our golden compounds for senescence therapy of fibroblasts. Among  these compounds  artemisinin was found to extend lifespan in yeast  through mimicking caloric restriction  78 . A derivative of artemisinin   dihydroartemisinin  has been demonstrated to ameliorate senescence in  myeloid derived suppressor cells  MDSC  dependent on the induction of  the Nrf2 HO 1 pathway  79 . Artesunate  another derivative of arte  misinin  by increasing   catenin expression suppressed cell senescence  in UVB irradiated HaCaT keratinocytes  80 . Furthermore  artemisinin  was shown to inhibit cell cycle progression in several cancer cell lines  through downregulation of cell cycle progression factors  Cyclin  Dependent Kinase 4  CDK4  and Cyclin D1  CCND1   81 82 . CCND1  also existed in the overexpressed signature of fibroblast senescence in  the current investigation. However  to our knowledge  the effect of  artemisinin has not been evaluated on senescent fibroblast cells yet. The  similarity between senescence signature and cancer signature can be  regarded as an opportunity for simultaneous targeting of cancer cells  and chemotherapeutics induced senescence. Moreover  this can help  dealing with the detrimental effects of senescence in cancer such as enhanced tumorigenesis caused by the massive accumulation of senes   cent cells and SASP  83 . Considering glutamine  evidence has indicated  that its level is linked with aging manifestation  84 . Glutamine also  mediates evasion from therapy induced senescence in cancer cells  85 .  In similar research  glutaminolysis  which is the process of the degra   dation of glutamine  has been shown to have a crucial role in the survival  of senescent cells  and it is offered that its inhibition may contribute to  senolysis  86 87 . Additionally  tangeretin decelerated aging and  increased heat stress resistance in Caenorhabditis elegans  88 . Tanger   etin at the concentration of 50  M induces cell cycle G1 arrest through  inhibiting cyclin dependent kinases 2 and 4 activities in colorectal car  cinoma COLO205 cells  89 . At approximately the same concentration   54  M   G1 cell cycle arrest was observed in both human breast and  colon cancer cells as well  90 . This cell cycle arrest was not permanent.  On the other hand  tangeretin at the concentration of 2  M protected  WI 38 fibroblasts against H2O2 oxidative stress with no decline in cell  viability  however  at concentrations above 4  M  it was shown that  tangeretin restrict the cell viability of these fibroblasts. The concentra   tion used in CMap was 10  M  Dataset S4 . Thus  experimental in  vestigations on the effects of the low concentrations of tangeretin on cell  cycle regulation and senescence in primary fibroblasts are required.  In the PPI network illustrated in Fig. 3  all compounds have at have  one direct connection with the fibroblast signature of senescence  which  is in agreement with their negative proximity scores. TAR DNA binding  protein 43  TARDBP   which is inhibited by artemisinin  tangeritin  and  castanospermine  physically interacts with signal recognition particle  receptor subunit beta protein  SRPRB . A previous study showed that the  ectopic expression of SRPRB  also called APMCF1  in Human Hepato   cellular carcinoma cells  HHCC  by gene transfection can cause G1 cell  cycle arrest through the down regulation of TIMP3 and the up   regulation of the CDK inhibitors p21  91 . Similarly  SRPRB is upregu   lated in the present signature. TARDBP inhibition could indirectly  inhibit SRPRB  which could be the possible mechanism  by which these  compounds have been hypothesized to act upon and exhibit an  anti senescence effect.  Having TARDBP explicitly as the shared target gene of artemisinin   tangeritin  and castanospermine is consistent with the negative separa   tion scores for the pairs of these compounds. Glutamine  whose target  module is separated from those 3 compounds  has no detected shared  target gene with these other compounds. Consequently  complementary  exposure pattern analysis bioinformatically revealed that the combina   tion of glutamine with tangeretin  artemisinin  or castanospermine can  be employed to intervene in the fibroblast senescence genetic system in  order to increase the senescence ameliorative efficacy while maintaining  minimal side effects. There were some limitations to this study. Some  genes listed in the core fibroblast senescence signature were not used by  the provider in querying CMap  gene names mentioned in Dataset S1 .  Among these genes  TET1 and TET2 that have been recognized as the  inducers of senescence  were not queried. This would substantially  downgrade the quality of the connected perturbation and the expected  results. In addition  the PPI networks are also likely to be incomplete and  influenced by publication bias. Not only are the connections between  proteins incomplete  but there are also a lot of voids for drug targets to  be discovered. The incompleteness of the data might have contributed to  the miss prediction of the outcome therapeutic effects. Experimentation  is a mandate for the validation of the predictions.  To summarize  first  we gathered the shared senescence genes in fi  broblasts and determined their functional association with aging. We  proposed these genes as an impaired system  in order to inverse fibro  blast senescence  this system should be targeted. Afterward  we sug  gested 4 novel compounds with 3 combinations as fibroblast senescence  therapeutics which need to be further validated through experimental  studies. What was done for suggesting these compounds as potential  therapeutics in this study was to utilize different methodologies that are  getting more widespread for bioinformatics studies with the goal of drug  discovery and to unite them to achieve better predictive results. Such A. Nayeri Rad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100920 9approaches can greatly decrease the cost and speed up drug discoveries  for disorders that have no treatments yet including age related  disorders.  Funding  This work was supported by Vice chancellor for Research and  Technology of Shiraz University of Medical Sciences  Shiraz  Iran  grant  No. 24168 .  Data availability  Supplementary files and datasets associated with the article can be  found in the online version of the manuscript.  Code availability  Scripts associated with the generation of the results can be found in  the supplementary information of the online version of the manuscript.  Codes used for proximity and separation analysis were gathered from a  previous study referred to in the  Methods   section.  CRediT authorship contribution statement  Amirhossein Nayeri Rad  Conceptualization  Methodology  Data  curation  Formal analysis  Visualization  Writing   original draft. Gol  naz Shams  Conceptualization  Methodology  Data curation  Visuali   zation  Writing   original draft. Roberto A. Avelar  Conceptualization   Formal analysis  Visualization  Writing   review   editing. Mohammad  Hossein Morowvat  Conceptualization  Writing   review   editing   Supervision. Younes Ghasemi  Resources  Supervision.  Declaration of competing interest  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial  interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence  the work reported in this paper.  Acknowledgment  The authors would like to thank Dr. Jo ao Pedro de Magalh  aes for his  precious advice during the project. They would also like to appreciate  Ms. A. Keivanshekouh at the Research Consultation Center  RCC  of  Shiraz University of Medical Sciences for her invaluable assistance in  editing the manuscript.  Appendix A.Supplementary data  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https   doi.  org 10.1016 j.imu.2022.100920 .  References   1 L opez Ot n C  Blasco MA  Partridge L  Serrano M  Kroemer G. The hallmarks of  aging. Cell 2013 153 1194  217.   2 Hayflick L  Moorhead PS. The serial cultivation of human diploid cell strains. Exp  Cell Res 1961 25 585  621.   3 Burton DG  Krizhanovsky V. Physiological and pathological consequences of  cellular senescence. Cell Mol Life Sci 2014 71 4373  86.   4 Dalle Pezze P  Nelson G  Otten EG  Korolchuk VI  Kirkwood TB  von Zglinicki T   Shanley DP. Dynamic modelling of pathways to cellular senescence reveals  strategies for targeted interventions. PLoS Comput Biol 2014 10 e1003728 .   5 Niedernhofer LJ  Robbins PD. Senotherapeutics for healthy ageing. Nat Rev Drug  Discov 2018 17 377 .   6 Laberge R M  Sun Y  Orjalo AV  Patil CK  Freund A  Zhou L  Curran SC  Davalos AR   Wilson Edell KA  Liu S. MTOR regulates the pro tumorigenic senescence associated  secretory phenotype by promoting IL1A translation. Nat Cell Biol 2015 17   1049  61.   7 Moiseeva O  Desch kenes Simard X  St Germain E  Igelmann S  Huot G  Cadar AE   Bourdeau V  Pollak MN  Ferbeyre G. Metformin inhibits the senescence associated secretory phenotype by interfering with IKK NF    B activation. Aging Cell 2013   12 489  98.   8 Noren Hooten N  Martin Montalvo A  Dluzen DF  Zhang Y  Bernier M   Zonderman AB  Becker KG  Gorospe M  de Cabo R  Evans MK. Metformin mediated  increase in DICER1 regulates microRNA expression and cellular senescence. Aging  Cell 2016 15 572  81.   9 Rad AN  Shams G  Safdarian M  Khorsandi L  Grillari J  Makhmalzadeh BS.  Metformin loaded cholesterol lysine conjugate nanoparticles  a novel approach for  protecting HDFs against UVB induced senescence. Int J Pharm 2020 586 119603 .   10  Xu M  Tchkonia T  Ding H  Ogrodnik M  Lubbers ER  Pirtskhalava T  White TA   Johnson KO  Stout MB  Mezera V. JAK inhibition alleviates the cellular senescence   associated secretory phenotype and frailty in old age. Proc Natl Acad Sci Unit  States Am 2015 112 E6301  10.   11  Chang J  Wang Y  Shao L  Laberge R M  Demaria M  Campisi J  Janakiraman K   Sharpless NE  Ding S  Feng W. Clearance of senescent cells by ABT263 rejuvenates  aged hematopoietic stem cells in mice. Nat Med 2016 22 78  83.   12  Zhu Y  Tchkonia T  Fuhrmann Stroissnigg H  Dai HM  Ling YY  Stout MB   Pirtskhalava T  Giorgadze N  Johnson KO  Giles CB. Identification of a novel  senolytic agent  navitoclax  targeting the Bcl 2 family of anti apoptotic factors.  Aging Cell 2016 15 428  35.   13  Wang Y  Chang J  Liu X  Zhang X  Zhang S  Zhang X  Zhou D  Zheng G. Discovery of  piperlongumine as a potential novel lead for the development of senolytic agents.  Aging  N Y  2016 8 2915 .   14  Zhu Y  Doornebal EJ  Pirtskhalava T  Giorgadze N  Wentworth M  Fuhrmann   Stroissnigg H  Niedernhofer LJ  Robbins PD  Tchkonia T  Kirkland JL. New agents  that target senescent cells  the flavone  fisetin  and the BCL XL inhibitors   A1331852 and A1155463. Aging  N Y  2017 9 955 .   15  Zhu Y  Tchkonia T  Pirtskhalava T  Gower AC  Ding H  Giorgadze N  Palmer AK   Ikeno Y  Hubbard GB  Lenburg M  O Hara SP  LaRusso NF  Miller JD  Roos CM   Verzosa GC  LeBrasseur NK  Wren JD  Farr JN  Khosla S  Stout MB  McGowan SJ   Fuhrmann Stroissnigg H  Gurkar AU  Zhao J  Colangelo D  Dorronsoro A  Ling YY   Barghouthy AS  Navarro DC  Sano T  Robbins PD  Niedernhofer LJ  Kirkland JL.  The Achilles   heel of senescent cells  from transcriptome to senolytic drugs. Aging  Cell 2015 14 644  58.   16  Di Micco R  Krizhanovsky V  Baker D  di Fagagna FdA. Cellular senescence in  ageing  from mechanisms to therapeutic opportunities. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2021   22 75  95.   17  Fitzgerald JB  Schoeberl B  Nielsen UB  Sorger PK. Systems biology and  combination therapy in the quest for clinical efficacy. Nat Chem Biol 2006 2   458 66.   18  Cheng F  Kov acs IA  Barab  asi A L. Network based prediction of drug combinations.  Nat Commun 2019 10 1197 .   19  Zhu Y  Tchkonia T  Pirtskhalava T  Gower AC  Ding H  Giorgadze N  Palmer AK   Ikeno Y  Hubbard GB  Lenburg M. The Achilles   heel of senescent cells  from  transcriptome to senolytic drugs. Aging Cell 2015 14 644  58.   20  Cheng F  Kov acs IA  Barab  asi A L. Network based prediction of drug combinations.  Nat Commun 2019 10 1  11.   21  D onertas   HM  Fuentealba M  Partridge L  Thornton JM. Identifying potential  ageing modulating drugs in silico. Trends Endocrinol Metabol 2019 30 118  31.   22  Fuentealba M  D onertas   HM  Williams R  Labbadia J  Thornton JM  Partridge L.  Using the drug protein interactome to identify anti ageing compounds for humans.  PLoS Comput Biol 2019 15 e1006639 .   23  Aliper A  Belikov AV  Garazha A  Jellen L  Artemov A  Suntsova M  Ivanova A   Venkova L  Borisov N  Buzdin A. In search for geroprotectors  in silico screening  and in vitro validation of signalome level mimetics of young healthy state. Aging   N Y  2016 8 2127 .   24  Koleti A  Terryn R  Stathias V  Chung C  Cooper DJ  Turner JP  Vidovi  c D  Forlin M   Kelley TT  D Urso A  Allen BK  Torre D  Jagodnik KM  Wang L  Jenkins SL   Mader C  Niu W  Fazel M  Mahi N  Pilarczyk M  Clark N  Shamsaei B  Meller J   Vasiliauskas J  Reichard J  Medvedovic M  Ma ayan A  Pillai A  Sch rer SC. Data  Portal for the Library of Integrated Network based Cellular Signatures  LINCS   program  integrated access to diverse large scale cellular perturbation response  data. Nucleic Acids Res 2017 46 D558  66.   25  Subramanian A  Narayan R  Corsello SM  Peck DD  Natoli TE  Lu X  Gould J   Davis JF  Tubelli AA  Asiedu JK  Lahr DL  Hirschman JE  Liu Z  Donahue M   Julian B  Khan M  Wadden D  Smith IC  Lam D  Liberzon A  Toder C  Bagul M   Orzechowski M  Enache OM  Piccioni F  Johnson SA  Lyons NJ  Berger AH   Shamji AF  Brooks AN  Vrcic A  Flynn C  Rosains J  Takeda DY  Hu R  Davison D   Lamb J  Ardlie K  Hogstrom L  Greenside P  Gray NS  Clemons PA  Silver S  Wu X   Zhao WN  Read Button W  Wu X  Haggarty SJ  Ronco LV  Boehm JS  Schreiber SL   Doench JG  Bittker JA  Root DE  Wong B  Golub TR. A next generation connectivity  map  L1000 platform and the first 1 000 000 profiles. Cell 2017 171 1437  1452  e1417 .   26  Koppelstaetter C  Leierer J  Rudnicki M  Kerschbaum J  Kronbichler A  Melk A   Mayer G  Perco P. Computational drug screening identifies compounds targeting  renal age associated molecular profiles. Comput Struct Biotechnol J 2019 17   843 53.   27  Stathias V  Jermakowicz AM  Maloof ME  Forlin M  Walters W  Suter RK   Durante MA  Williams SL  Harbour JW  Volmar CH  Lyons NJ  Wahlestedt C   Graham RM  Ivan ME  Komotar RJ  Sarkaria JN  Subramanian A  Golub TR   Schurer SC  Ayad NG. Drug and disease signature integration identifies synergistic  combinations in glioblastoma. Nat Commun 2018 9 5315 .   28  Peng Y  Yuan M  Xin J  Liu X  Wang J. Screening novel drug candidates for  Alzheimer  s disease by an integrated network and transcriptome analysis.  Bioinformatics 2020 36 4626  32. A. Nayeri Rad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100920 10 29  Shukla R  Henkel ND  Alganem K  Hamoud AR  Reigle J  Alnafisah RS  Eby HM   Imami AS  Creeden JF  Miruzzi SA  Meller J  McCullumsmith RE. Signature based  approaches for informed drug repurposing  targeting CNS disorders.  Neuropsychopharmacology 2021 46 116  30.   30  Liu TP  Hsieh YY  Chou CJ  Yang PM. Systematic polypharmacology and drug  repurposing via an integrated L1000 based Connectivity Map database mining.  R Soc Open Sci 2018 5 181321 .   31  Aliper A  Jellen L  Cortese F  Artemov A  Karpinsky Semper D  Moskalev A   Swick AG  Zhavoronkov A. Towards natural mimetics of metformin and  rapamycin. Aging  N Y  2017 9 2245  68.   32  D onertas   HM  Fuentealba Valenzuela M  Partridge L  Thornton JM. Gene  expression based drug repurposing to target aging. Aging Cell 2018 17 e12819 .   33  Calvert S  Tacutu R  Sharifi S  Teixeira R  Ghosh P  de Magalh  aes JP. A network  pharmacology approach reveals new candidate caloric restriction mimetics in C.  elegans. Aging Cell 2016 15 256  66.   34  Hopkins AL. Network pharmacology  the next paradigm in drug discovery. Nat  Chem Biol 2008 4 682  90.   35  Fotis C  Antoranz A  Hatziavramidis D  Sakellaropoulos T  Alexopoulos LG.  Network based technologies for early drug discovery. Drug Discov Today 2018 23   626 35.   36  Casella G  Munk R  Kim KM  Piao Y  De S  Abdelmohsen K  Gorospe M.  Transcriptome signature of cellular senescence. Nucleic Acids Res 2019 47   7294  305.   37  Hernandez Segura A  de Jong TV  Melov S  Guryev V  Campisi J  Demaria M.  Unmasking transcriptional heterogeneity in senescent cells. Curr Biol 2017 27   2652  60. e2654 .   38  Atanasov AG  Zotchev SB  Dirsch VM  Orhan IE  Banach M  Rollinger JM   Barreca D  Weckwerth W  Bauer R  Bayer EA  Majeed M  Bishayee A  Bochkov V   Bonn GK  Braidy N  Bucar F  Cifuentes A  D Onofrio G  Bodkin M  Diederich M   Dinkova Kostova AT  Efferth T  El Bairi K  Arkells N  Fan T P  Fiebich BL   Freissmuth M  Georgiev MI  Gibbons S  Godfrey KM  Gruber CW  Heer J  Huber LA   Ibanez E  Kijjoa A  Kiss AK  Lu A  Macias FA  Miller MJS  Mocan A  M ller R   Nicoletti F  Perry G  Pittal  a V  Rastrelli L  Ristow M  Russo GL  Silva AS  Schuster D   Sheridan H  Skalicka Wo  zniak K  Skaltsounis L  Sobarzo S  anchez E  Bredt DS   Stuppner H  Sureda A  Tzvetkov NT  Vacca RA  Aggarwal BB  Battino M   Giampieri F  Wink M  Wolfender J L  Xiao J  Yeung AWK  Lizard G  Popp MA   Heinrich M  Berindan Neagoe I  Stadler M  Daglia M  Verpoorte R  Supuran CT.  T. the International Natural Product Sciences  Natural products in drug discovery   advances and opportunities. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2021 20 200  16.   39  clusterProfiler  an R Package for Comparing Biological Themes Among Gene  Clusters 2012 16 284  7.   40  Durinck S  Moreau Y  Kasprzyk A  Davis S  De Moor B  Brazma A  Huber W.  BioMart and Bioconductor  a powerful link between biological databases and  microarray data analysis. Bioinformatics 2005 21 3439  40.   41  Durinck S  Spellman PT  Birney E  Huber W. Mapping identifiers for the integration  of genomic datasets with the R Bioconductor package biomaRt. Nat Protoc 2009 4   1184  91.   42  U.S. Department of Agriculture  Agricultural Research Service. Dr. Duke  s  Phytochemical and Ethnobotanical Databases. Home Page  http   phytochem.nal.  usda.gov    1992 2016. http   doi.org 10.15482 USDA.ADC 1239279 .   43  Wang Y  Zhang S  Li F  Zhou Y  Zhang Y  Wang Z  Zhang R  Zhu J  Ren Y  Tan Y   Qin C  Li Y  Li X  Chen Y  Zhu F. Therapeutic target database 2020  enriched  resource for facilitating research and early development of targeted therapeutics.  Nucleic Acids Res 2019 48 D1031  41.   44  Daina A  Michielin O  Zoete V. SwissTargetPrediction  updated data and new  features for efficient prediction of protein targets of small molecules. Nucleic Acids  Res 2019 47 W357  64.   45  Gaulton A  Bellis LJ  Bento AP  Chambers J  Davies M  Hersey A  Light Y   McGlinchey S  Michalovich D  Al Lazikani B  Overington JP. ChEMBL  a large scale  bioactivity database for drug discovery. Nucleic Acids Res 2011 40 D1100  7.   46  Guney E  Menche J  Vidal M  Bar abasi A L. Network based in silico drug efficacy  screening. Nat Commun 2016 7 10331 .   47  Zhou Y  Hou Y  Shen J  Huang Y  Martin W  Cheng F. Network based drug  repurposing for novel coronavirus 2019 nCoV SARS CoV 2. Cell Discovery 2020 6   14.   48  MorselliGysi D  do Valle  I  Zitnik M  Ameli A  Gan X  Varol O  Ghiassian SD   Patten JJ  Davey RA  Loscalzo J  Barab  asi A L. Network medicine framework for  identifying drug repurposing opportunities for COVID 19  118  2021   e2025581118 .   49  Hulsen T  de Vlieg J  Alkema W. BioVenn   a web application for the comparison  and visualization of biological lists using area proportional Venn diagrams. BMC  Genom 2008 9 488 .   50  Avelar RA  Ortega JG  Tacutu R  Tyler EJ  Bennett D  Binetti P  Budovsky A   Chatsirisupachai K  Johnson E  Murray A  Shields S  Tejada Martinez D   Thornton D  Fraifeld VE  Bishop CL  de Magalh  aes JP. A multidimensional systems  biology analysis of cellular senescence in aging and disease. Genome Biol 2020 21   91.   51  Qin Y  Zhong Y  Zhu M  Dang L  Yu H  Chen Z  Chen W  Wang X  Zhang H  Li Z.  Age  and sex associated differences in the glycopatterns of human salivary  glycoproteins and their roles against influenza A virus. J Proteome Res 2013 12   2742  54.   52  Sato Y  Endo T. Alteration of brain glycoproteins during aging  10  2010.  p. S32 40.   53  Lee DH  Oh J H  Chung JH. Glycosaminoglycan and proteoglycan in skin aging.  J Dermatol Sci 2016 83 174  81.  54  Yu S  Lee E  Tsogbadrakh B  Son G I  Kim M. Prenatal hyperbaric normoxia  treatment improves healthspan and regulates chitin metabolic genes in Drosophila  melanogaster. Aging 2016 8 2538  50.   55  Takemon Y  Chick JM  Gerdes Gyuricza I  Skelly DA  Devuyst O  Gygi SP   Churchill GA  Korstanje R. Proteomic and transcriptomic profiling reveal different  aspects of aging in the kidney. Elife 2021 10 .   56  Ciccarone F  Tagliatesta S  Caiafa P  Zampieri M. DNA methylation dynamics in  aging  how far are we from understanding the mechanisms  Mech Ageing Dev  2018 174 3  17.   57  Unnikrishnan A  Freeman WM  Jackson J  Wren JD  Porter H  Richardson A. The  role of DNA methylation in epigenetics of aging. Pharmacol Therapeut 2019 195   172 85.   58  Zhou Z  Sun B  Yu D  Bian M. Roles of tRNA metabolism in aging and lifespan. Cell  Death Dis 2021 12 548 .   59  Salminen A  Kauppinen A  Kaarniranta K. 2 Oxoglutarate dependent dioxygenases  are sensors of energy metabolism  oxygen availability  and iron homeostasis   potential role in the regulation of aging process. Cell Mol Life Sci 2015 72   3897  914.   60  Podolskiy D  Molodtcov I  Zenin A  Kogan V  Menshikov LI  Gladyshev VN   Reis RJS  Fedichev POJ. Critical dynamics of gene networks is a mechanism behind  ageing and Gompertz law. 2015 .   61  Papakonstantinou E  Roth M  Karakiulakis G. Hyaluronic acid  a key molecule in  skin aging. Derm Endocrinol 2012 4 253  8.   62  Herman AB  Anerillas C  Harris SC  Munk R  Martindale Jennifer L  Yang X  Mazan   Mamczarz K  Zhang Y  Heckenbach Indra J  Scheibye Knudsen M  De S  Sen P   Abdelmohsen K  Gorospe M. Reduction of lamin B receptor levels by miR 340 5p  disrupts chromatin  promotes cell senescence and enhances senolysis. Nucleic  Acids Res 2021 49 7389  405.   63  Filipczak PT  Leng S  Tellez CS  Do KC  Grimes MJ  Thomas CL  Walton   Filipczak SR  Picchi MA  Belinsky SA. p53 Suppressed oncogene TET1 prevents  cellular aging in lung cancer. Cancer Res 2019 79 1758 .   64  Gao J  Wang H  Shen J  Liu X  Zhu X  Zhao E  Li G  Sun Y  Yin F  Liu Z  Sun YE   Liu H. Mutual regulation between GDF11 and TET2 prevents senescence of  mesenchymal stem cells. bioRxiv 2020 2020. 2030.008722  2003 .   65  Larson BL  Ylostalo J  Lee RH  Gregory C  Prockop DJ. Sox11 is expressed in early  progenitor human multipotent stromal cells and decreases with extensive  expansion of the cells. Tissue Eng 2010 16 3385  94.   66  Atadja P  Wong H  Veillete C  Riabowol K. Overexpression of cyclin D1 blocks  proliferation of normal diploid fibroblasts. Exp Cell Res 1995 217 205  16.   67  Leontieva OV  Demidenko ZN  Blagosklonny MV. MEK drives cyclin D1  hyperelevation during geroconversion. Cell Death Differ 2013 20 1241  9.   68  Mun GI  Boo YC. Identification of CD44 as a senescence induced cell adhesion gene  responsible for the enhanced monocyte recruitment to senescent endothelial cells.  Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2010 298 H2102  11.   69  Tang X  Milyavsky M  Goldfinger N  Rotter V. Amyloid    precursor like protein  APLP1 is a novel p53 transcriptional target gene that augments neuroblastoma cell  death upon genotoxic stress. Oncogene 2007 26 7302  12.   70  Wlaschek M  Maity P  Makrantonaki E  Scharffetter Kochanek K. Connective tissue  and fibroblast senescence in skin aging. J Invest Dermatol 2021 141 985  92.   71  Pardo A  Selman M. Lung fibroblasts  Aging  and Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis   13  2016. p. S417  21.   72  Biernacka A  Frangogiannis NG. Aging and cardiac fibrosis. Aging Dis 2011 2   158 73.   73  Gillis J  Ballouz S  Pavlidis P. Bias tradeoffs in the creation and analysis of protein   protein interaction networks. J Proteonomics 2014 100 44  54.   74  Gruber F  Kremslehner C  Eckhart L  Tschachler E. Cell aging and cellular  senescence in skin aging   recent advances in fibroblast and keratinocyte biology.  Exp Gerontol 2020 130 110780 .   75  Toutfaire M  Bauwens E  Debacq Chainiaux F. The impact of cellular senescence in  skin ageing  a notion of mosaic and therapeutic strategies. Biochem Pharmacol  2017 142 1  12.   76  Yanai H  Shteinberg A  Porat Z  Budovsky A  Braiman A  Ziesche R  Fraifeld VE.  Cellular senescence like features of lung fibroblasts derived from idiopathic  pulmonary fibrosis patients. Aging 2015 7 664  72.   77  Zhu F  Li Y  Zhang J  Piao C  Liu T  Li HH  Du J. Senescent cardiac fibroblast is  critical for cardiac fibrosis after myocardial infarction. PLoS One 2013 8 e74535 .   78  Wang D  Wu M  Li S  Gao Q  Zeng Q. Artemisinin mimics calorie restriction to  extend yeast lifespan via a dual phase mode  a conclusion drawn from global  transcriptome profiling. Sci China Life Sci 2015 58 451  65.   79  Li D  Qi J  Wang J  Pan Y  Li J  Xia X  Dou H  Hou Y. Protective effect of  dihydroartemisinin in inhibiting senescence of myeloid derived suppressor cells  from lupus mice via Nrf2 HO 1 pathway. Free Radic Biol Med 2019 143 260  74.   80  Tian L  Ke D  Hong Y  Zhang C  Tian D  Chen L  Zhan L  Zong S. Artesunate  treatment ameliorates ultraviolet irradiation driven skin photoaging via increasing  beta catenin expression. Aging  N Y  2021 13 25325  41.   81  Willoughby JA  Sr  Sundar SN  Cheung M  Tin AS  Modiano J  Firestone GL.  Artemisinin blocks prostate cancer growth and cell cycle progression by disrupting  Sp1 interactions with the cyclin dependent kinase 4  CDK4  promoter and  inhibiting CDK4 gene expression. J Biol Chem 2009 284 2203  13.   82  Jia J  Qin Y  Zhang L  Guo C  Wang Y  Yue X  Qian J. Artemisinin inhibits  gallbladder cancer cell lines through triggering cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Mol  Med Rep 2016 13 4461  8.   83  Yang J  Liu M  Hong D  Zeng M  Zhang X. The paradoxical Role of cellular  senescence in cancer  vol. 9  2021 .   84  Canfield C A  Bradshaw PC. Amino acids in the regulation of aging and aging   related diseases. Transl MedAging 2019 3 70  89. A. Nayeri Rad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100920 11 85  Pacifico F  Badolati N  Mellone S  Stornaiuolo M  Leonardi A  Crescenzi E.  Glutamine promotes escape from therapy induced senescence in tumor cells. Aging   N Y  2021 13 20962 91.   86  Johmura Y  Yamanaka T  Omori S  Wang T W  Sugiura Y  Matsumoto M  Suzuki N   Kumamoto S  Yamaguchi K  Hatakeyama S  Takami T  Yamaguchi R  Shimizu E   Ikeda K  Okahashi N  Mikawa R  Suematsu M  Arita M  Sugimoto M  Nakayama KI   Furukawa Y  Imoto S  Nakanishi M. Senolysis by glutaminolysis inhibition  ameliorates various age associated disorders. Science 2021 371 265 70.   87  Pan C  Locasale JW. Targeting metabolism to influence aging. Science 2021 371   234 5.   88  Y. Liu  Z. Zhou  L. Yin  M. Zhu  F. Wang  L. Zhang  H. Wang  Z. Zhou  H. Zhu  C.  Huang  S. Fan  Tangeretin promotes lifespan associated with insulin insulin like growth factor 1 signaling pathway and heat resistance in Caenorhabditis elegans   BioFactors  n a.   89  Pan M H  Chen W J  Lin Shiau S Y  Ho C T  Lin J K. Tangeretin induces cell cycle  G1 arrest through inhibiting cyclin dependent kinases 2 and 4 activities as well as  elevating Cdk inhibitors p21 and p27 in human colorectal carcinoma cells.  Carcinogenesis 2002 23 1677 84.   90  Morley KL  Ferguson PJ  Koropatnick J. Tangeretin and nobiletin induce G1 cell  cycle arrest but not apoptosis in human breast and colon cancer cells. Cancer Lett  2007 251 168 78.   91  Li Q  Yan W  Cheng S  Guo S  Wang W  Zhang Z  Wang L  Zhang J  Wang W.  Introduction of G1 phase arrest in Human Hepatocellular carcinoma cells  HHCC   by APMCF1 gene transfection through the down regulation of TIMP3 and up   regulation of the CDK inhibitors p21. Mol Biol Rep 2006 33 257 63. A. Nayeri Rad et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

