Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100931 Available online 25 March 2022 2352 9148   2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license   http   creativecommons.org licenses by 4.0   .Putting digital epidemiology into practice  PIA  Prospective Monitoring and  Management Application  Jana K. Heisea b  Robert Deyc  Marcelo Emmerichc  Yvonne Kemmlinga  Sabrina Sistiga   G erard Krausea b e  Stefanie Castella b    aDepartment for Epidemiology  Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research  Braunschweig  Germany  bGerman Centre for Infection Research  DZIF   Germany  cConventic  GmbH  Bonn  Germany  eTWINCORE  Centre for Experimental and Clinical Infection Research  a Joint Venture of the Hannover Medical School and the Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research   Hannover  Germany    ARTICLE INFO   Keywords   eResearch  Digital epidemiology  Electronic data capture system  Syndromic surveillance  COVID 19  SARS CoV 2 pandemic ABSTRACT   Introduction  Epidemiological data collection is often challenged by low response and  in the case of cohorts  poor  long term compliance  i.e. a high drop out. For the correct recording of incident or recurring health events  that  are subject to recall difficulties  gathering of data during the event and immediate response of the participants is  crucial. This is especially true when biosampling that catches a transient biological situation like COVID 19 is  involved. In addition  emerging research topics  e.g. pandemics like the current SARS CoV 2  demand a flexible  approach regarding content while allowing for complex and varying study designs. To meet these needs  we  developed an eResearch system for prospective monitoring and management of incident health events  PIA .  Methods  Programming PIA focusses on IT security and data protection as well as aiming for a user friendly and  motivating design e.g. through feedback for study participants. The main building blocks of the infrastructure are  identical functionalities in web based  iOS and Android compatible application to strengthen the user acceptance  of the participants. The backend consists of services and databases  which are all containerised using Docker  containers. All programming is based on the JavaScript ecosystem as this is widely used and well supported.  Results  PIA offers complete management of observational epidemiological studies with six different roles  PIA  administrator  researcher  participant manager  study nurse  consent manager and participant. Each role has a  specific interface  so that different functions e.g. implementation of new questionnaires  administration of bio  samples or management of participant contacts can be performed by different personae. PIA can be integrated in  the IT system of ongoing studies like the German National Cohort but also used as stand alone system. The  software is open source  AGPL3.0   https   github.com hzi braunschweig pia system .  Discussion  Despite the abundance of existing Electronic Data Capture Systems  EDC systems   we developed our  own generic tool that combines monitoring and management in order to use it for specific applications e.g. in  certain pre existing epidemiological studies or for syndromic surveillance in the current pandemic. Hence  PIA is  continuously adapted to emerging requirements. Currently  systematic feedback from users is collected. We aim  to improve the user experience of PIA as well as provide further feedback and additional elements like gamifi   cation in the future.    1.Introduction  1.1. Background  A major challenge in epidemiologic cohort studies is to achieve high  response and long term compliance of participants  1 . Study fatigue is especially problematic if research questions require repeated partici   pants   responses or the collection of biosamples that aim at catching a  transient biological situation. Especially studies on acute  transient in  fections like COVID 19 or influenza carry the challenge of requiring a  participant to report on symptoms immediately at the beginning of the  episode  in order to allow timely collection of biosamples for   Corresponding author. Inhoffenstr. 7  38124  Braunschweig  Germany.  E mail address  stefanie.castell helmholtz hzi.de  S. Castell .   Contents lists available at ScienceDirect  Informatics in Medicine Unlocked  u   zkw  s yo kr o     1ow  o to 1m y2w m k o2ty   https   doi.org 10.1016 j.imu.2022.100931  Received 9 December 2021  Received in revised form 18 March 2022  Accepted 23 March 2022   

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100931 2microbiological confirmation  2 . Longitudinal data capture is also  required in the field of recurring health events like asthma or angina  pectoris episodes.  The development of a new and specific eResearch system allows the  implementation of repetitive  e.g. weekly questionnaires  without much  organisational effort. The data collection can be carried out in real time   so that recall bias may be avoided.  Furthermore  the ability to use feedback and reminder functions to  strengthen participant motivation for long term participation makes  such an eResearch system a promising approach to overcome afore   mentioned challenges and at the same time improve participant satis  faction and data quality for novel approaches in infection research  3 4 .  1.2. Requirements  The main requirements for such a digital tool should focus on IT  security and data privacy including separation of person identifying data  from medical questionnaire data  facilitating motivation of participants  to use the tool repeatedly and possibly in long term studies  and easy  adaptability to novel research questions through generalisation.  Furthermore eResearch tools should be free and open source to ensure  transparency and make it re useable for other researchers  5 .  In infectious disease epidemiology the ability for real time response  is an additional requirement e.g. because of symptomatic biosample  collection. Technical flexibility  i.e. cross platform implementation   allowing also to switch between mobile and web application  is another  important feature to enhance user acceptance. For long term usage  the  system should provide a benefit to participants. Data entries should be  rewarded with  personal  health information or feedback  e.g. labora   tory results .  In addition  scalability should enable application of the tool for  different projects at the same time. The use of open standards should be  applied wherever possible to support such scalability  flexibility and  sustainability. Additionally  to assist future changes regarding user in  terfaces  a clear separation between data  i.e. databases  business logic  i.  e. backend  and user interfaces  i.e. frontend  is needed. To avoid human  error of users  automation including adjustable real time data validation  should be applied wherever possible.  Another important requirement is to address the specific roles of an  epidemiologic study  e.g. researcher  participant manager  taking role   specific data protection specifications into account.  A particular challenge in meeting the requirements is  to create a  stand alone eResearch system that also can be integrated in the technical  and procedural standards of already existing research frameworks such  as the German National Cohort  NAKO   6 7  or connected to other  digital health systems such as SORMAS  Surveillance  Outbreak  Response Management   Analysis System   8 9  with the aim of  exchanging data.  The requirements were developed in an iterative process including  the product owner  future professional users of PIA and the software  development team with the support of an external IT consulting  company.  1.3. State of the art  Based on the defined requirements  especially for the integration into  existing IT systems and the fast and flexible adaption to upcoming  research areas a customised  specific software solution is necessary.  Such flexibility is not available e.g. in the well established web based   Grippe Web . This is a study tool that is specifically designed for acute  respiratory infections and influenza like illness and also includes viro  logical surveillance via self sampling of nasal swabs  10 11 . To our  knowledge   Grippe Web  is not designed to provide the necessary  technical flexibility  and thematic modularity paramount for our envi  sioned research needs. This flexibility in turn is the core element of  online survey solutions like LimeSurvey  12 . This tool is flexible with respect to content of the questions to be posed  but does not allow in  dividual  event based surveys or other kind of feedback procedures and  is also not designed for study management.  In contrast to the systems mentioned above ECD   systems such as  secuTrial  13   RedCap  14 16   castor  17  or Marvin  18  offer  comprehensive study and participant management and considerably  simplify the collection of clinical data  primarily by medical personal.  Also well known and in several studies implemented is  OpenClinica    19 20 . In addition to electronic data capture via medical staff  data  management  reporting and randomisation functions  participants can  enter their data themselves  Patient reported outcomes   ePRO . The   Climedo  system  21  includes similar functionalities and focuses on  patient participation. They have become known through their symptom  diary developed in the context of the current SARS CoV 2 pandemic   which transfers symptoms of contacts and cases to the system SORMAS   8 9 .  Most of the ECD systems offer  if any  a browser based patient  version  which is functional and expedient rather than engaging study  participants in the long term and generating fun to use.  One system that provides a separate app for participants is REDCap.  The patient app as an external module is called MyCap  22 . With  MyCap participants can complete questionnaires themselves and docu  ment examinations and tasks  e.g. memory tests . Unfortunately many of  these systems are not publicly available  i.e. are not open source  are  costly  and cannot be integrated into existing systems.  Open Data Kit  ODK  on the other hand is an open source software   which offers many possibilities regarding the integration into existing  systems  23 . ODK is used for collecting  managing  and using data in  resource constrained environments. One disadvantage is that the tool is  only designed for Android operating systems.  However  the focus of these electronic data capture systems is on  comprehensive data collection and management  even in areas with  poor network connections offline  by professional personnel  less on  participant adherence to repeated self administered questionnaires  self   sampling of biospecimens including feedback and  hence  long term use  in epidemiological studies.  The software solutions mentioned were identified by searching da  tabases  such as Google  Pubmed and Capterra  which offers a large  catalogue of available software including feature checklists and com  parison between systems  24 . All tools are comparable to PIA either  through their flexible implementation of questionnaires and manage   ment functions  EDC  systems  or through their thematic commonality   Grippeweb . However  all systems cover only parts of our requirements.  We therefore developed a novel tool  which aims at offering all of the  required functionalities and design features within one system. A com  parison of selected electronic data capture systems is shown in Appendix  1.  2.Methods  PIA is envisioned as an extendable platform for the deployment of an  eResearch system for management and capture of incident events. The  software is free and open source on Github  AGPL3.0   https   github.co  m hzi braunschweig pia system.  The main building blocks of this infrastructure are identical func  tionalities in web based and mobile applications for the participants   specific user interfaces for all roles  and a backend consisting of services  and databases. We integrated end users of all professional roles in the  development approach  especially the team of the NAKO study centre   for which the system was primarily developed to ensure consideration of  all necessities and aspects of their workflows. The aim was to digitize  certain processes for conduction a longitudinal epidemiological study   hence  we e.g. observed processes at the study centre  wrote them down  as user stories which were in turn adjusted by staff from the study centre.  This process is ongoing  we priorities feedback on PIA from all profes   sional users in our 11 studies as part of our scrum process. The highest J. K. Heise et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100931 3priority is given to data protection and IT security requirements. Other  criteria are feasibility of the change requests  added value  urgency as  well as time and effort required. In November 2018  we conducted the  first software testing by potential study participants. 12 test users pro  vided structured feedback via an usability questionnaire.  Prior to each study  a pre test is conducted in which  among other  things  e.g. the organisational study procedure  the usability of the  system is evaluated. In addition to qualitative feedback  answers to a  standardized questionnaire instrument  System Usability Scale  SUS     25  are assessed. Any bugs we learn about either as part of our  continuous tests as product owner or via our ticket system are prioritised  and fixed if necessary.  Complementary to the review of adherence with European Union  General Data Protection Regulation by the  Bundesbeauftragten f r den  Datenschutz und die Informationsfreiheit   we commissioned external  penetration tests to assess security of the system.  2.1. Architecture  The main architectural decision concerned the choice of tools and  frameworks based on one common programming language. We chose to  base all programing on the JavaScript ecosystem  because it is widely  used and offers a large portfolio of established and well supported tools  and frameworks  26 . For reasons of platform independency  easy  patching  scalability  and adaptability  we follow the approach of con  tainerised software development using Docker containers  27 . The  communication between external systems and PIA schematised in Fig. 1  is only possible via a reverse proxy as well as an API gateway and always  encrypted in transit  TLS SSL . All internal microservices and database  systems are sealed off in separate Docker containers and cannot be  directly reached from the outside. To further ensure data protection  requirements  we separated research data into three PostgreSQL data  bases  which are running on disjoint virtual machines  VMs  and are  located in different networks. The first one   qPIA   consists of clinical or  research data  the second one   iPIA   contains personal identifiers such  as names and addresses  while the third one   ewPIA   contains partic   ipants  consents  and in the long term  also withdrawals. Lab results  from the laboratory of the  Hannover Medical School  MHH   are  reimported in HL7 format using a sftp server. PIA is integrated into the  external EDC system NatCoEdc  the IT system of the NAKO  as an iFrame  and via API calls. Notifications to mobile devices and web browsers are  sent using Google s Firebase Cloud Messaging Service  FCM  which is  used in a way that respects data protection. In the context of the current  SARS CoV 2 pandemic  the architecture has been extended to connect  PIA to SORMAS  Surveillance Outbreak Response Management    Analysis System  which is used for case and contact management by  public health departments  8 9 . As symptom diary  health information  is transmitted from qPIA to SORMAS via a dedicated application pro  gramming interface  API .  2.2. Web and mobile application  We decided to use Angular  https   angular.io  together with Node.  js  https   nodejs.org  for the web application part. Angular is a well   established framework  reported together with Node.js as most widely  used  26 . For the mobile application  we used the Ionic Framework   https   ionicframework.com   which is based on Angular  thus  facili   tating reusability of components. The Ionic framework made it possible  to build a hybrid app that runs on Android as well as iOS devices with  one shared codebase. The disadvantages of this approach are possible  performance losses and the lack of  native feeling  user interface ele  ments in comparison to natively build apps  28 . On the other hand  a  shared codebase means less work  a reduction in skill requirements for  software developer and  therefore  a decrease in development and  maintenance costs. 2.3. Backend service  The backend consists of several Node.js servers that are executed in  Docker containers  Fig. 1 . Node.js is a resource efficient JavaScript  based platform with little overhead and the only solution for con  tainerised JavaScript services.  2.4. Storage concepts  Persistent storage is realized with PostgreSQL  www.postgresql.or  .  MySQL as an alternative would have been suitable as well  both systems  perform on a very similar level  29 . The decision to use PostgreSQL  over MySQL was taken due to its permissive open source license and the  available developer experience.  2.5. Scalability  Horizontal scalability  i.e. scaling by adding more machines rather  than increasing the machines  power  was achieved by the use of  container technology in combination with stateless Representational  State Transfer  REST  APIs. The REST paradigm requires a request to  include all the data necessary for a server to process the request  without  any additional data stored on the server  which makes it ideal for hor  izontal scaling.  3.Results  3.1. Implementation  We implemented six different roles  system administrator   researcher  participant manager  study nurse  consent manager and  participant with specific interfaces and functions. Access is granted  differentially  The researcher has access to qPIA and  thus  to all study  data  i.e. medical data  including answers to questionnaires. Access to  iPIA with contact data of all participants is exclusively reserved to the  participant manager. The consent manager has access to a separate  database  ewPIA  that contains only consents and withdrawals.  The role assignment is performed by the system administrator.  3.1.1. System administrator  The administrator sets up new studies within the app  invites new  personnel into PIA and assigns those individuals with specific roles and  rights within a specific study. The system administrator is also author   ised to delete studies or to revoke permissions within studies.  3.1.2. Researcher  In PIA  the researcher has the possibility to implement new or change  existing questionnaires including temporal scheduling of the question   naires or defining conditions  which request participants to respond to  certain questions. The researcher can set date s   weekday  and time  intervals for questionnaire display e.g. daily  weekly or monthly as well  as the duration and activation time of the questionnaire. Researchers can  implement algorithms for displaying a network of conditional ques  tionnaires after specific data entry events. Researchers can put re  minders as emails or in app push notifications in place including  number  timing and title of notifications to enhance participants   response. Researchers can also define conditions  after which the tool  invites participants to take and ship biospecimens  including scanning of  barcodes of the tubes. This can also be used to document drugs using the  Pharmacy Product Number. For other documentation purposes  e.g. of  vaccination cards  the invitation to take pictures can be integrated into  questionnaires. The research team sees all questionnaire data  including  laboratory reports  and can export them.  3.1.3. Participant manager  The participant manager administers personal contacts with J. K. Heise et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100931 4 Fig. 1.Formalisation of network environment of PIA  basic version without connection to SORMAS .  J. K. Heise et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100931 5participants and can enter identifying data  e.g. names . All contact  events  e.g. telephone calls  are documented and can later be used  anonymously for scientific analyses. An interface with a software that  schedules participant visits within the NAKO  7  secures automated data  transfer  while maintaining separation of research data and data that  would allow re identification of individuals. The integrated serial letters  functionality within PIA also serves to send new material  i.e. bio  specimen containers  to participants who are in need of new  self sampling kits.  3.1.4. Study nurse  The study nurses register new participants in PIA and generate first  login data that are provided to the participants. In addition  the study  nurses can store electronic case report forms  eCRF  in PIA regardless of  whether the application is intended to be used by participants or by  study personnel  e.g. for computer assisted personal interviews  CAPI    or biospecimen collection in a study centre.  PIA is integrated into the IT system of the NAKO  authentication of  study nurses is done in the background by exchanging a unique identi   fier a priori known to both system and a key not known to third parties.  This has the advantage that the study nurses do not have to log into IT  systems twice when registering a new participant.  3.1.5. Consent manager  Consent managers have access to PIA users   consents and in the  future withdrawals in the database  ewPIA  . Consents and withdrawals  are stored in the  ewPIA   database for a certain period of time according  to good epidemiological practice  30 .  3.1.6. Participant  Participants can choose whether to use the mobile app or the web  version and switch between the two at any time. The system presents an  overview of all questionnaires and their respective status to the partic   ipant  Fig. 2b . Push notifications via the app or e mails for PIA web   users will remind participants to respond to new or overdue question   naires. If implemented by the researchers for a specific study  comple   mentary to scheduled or conditional questionnaires  participants can use  PIA to submit a spontaneous report at any time  enabling real time  documentation of acute symptoms and timely collection of bio  specimens. The barcode of which can be scanned  Fig. 2c  or entered  manually. The results of the laboratory analysis are automatically re  ported back individually to the participant via the app using HL7 for  studies conducted together with the regional university. Additional  feedback like personal health information as well as gamification ele  ments are planned. Gamification elements will include a positive text  when a certain percentage of answered questionnaires has been  completed and encouraging messages when only a few questionnaires  have been answered. In addition we envision to graphically display  statistics on the occurrence of disease in the study population over time  with configurable display options for participants.  3.2. Projects with PIA  PIA is currently used in 11 projects  www.info pia.de  . In the  infection cohorts  ZIFCO  Integrated DZIF Infection Cohort within the  German National Cohort    31    App based Infection Assessment in  RESIST  iAR      DIMI   Digital infection monitoring in persons living  with immunodeficiency   and  SMARAGD   Sensors for measuring  aerosols and reactive gases to deduce health effects    PIA is used for  symptom monitoring of transient infectious disease with a special focus  on respiratory diseases including laboratory diagnostics.  In further projects  e.g. MuSPAD   Multi local and serial cross   sectional prevalence study on antibodies against SARS CoV 2 in Ger  many  32   RESIST   Resolving Infection Susceptibility   PIA is used as  electronic data capture system for interviews and medical examinations  by medical staff. In the context of the SARS CoV 2 pandemic  PIA served as COVID 19 symptom monitoring system for hospital and nursing staff  as well as a symptom diary  connected to the case and contact person  management system SORMAS   OGD  33 .  Currently  more than 140 questionnaires are implemented in PIA and  about 41 000 participants registered  of which approximately 39 700  are part of the MuSPAD study.  4.Discussion  Main requirements in the development of PIA were compliance with  German data protection regulations including separation of person  identifying data and medical questionnaire data  easy adaptability to  novel research questions  generalisability  and the ability to function as  a stand alone app  but also be suitable for integration into existing IT  frameworks of studies such as the NAKO. Further requirements were  implementation of the specific roles necessary in an epidemiologic  study  e.g. researchers  participant managers  study nurses and partici   pants. The real time collection of data as well as the collection of bio  specimens immediately during the disease episode allows for  microbiological confirmation that is essential in infectious disease  studies. The implementation of cyclic questionnaires and the develop   ment of algorithm for displaying a network of conditional question   naires at specific times and after specific data entry events were  necessary for long term follow up of the participants. The implementa   tion of these complex survey structures in combination with the desired  management functions would not have been possible either paper based  or with already existing survey tools like Limesurvey. Electronic Data  Capture systems such as REDCAP are being used increasingly for data  collection in clinical trials. They offer a complete study management and  capture various types of data. However  less attention is given to long   term use by and compliance of participants  which is crucial for epide   miological cohort studies running for several years.  By  further  developing PIA we aim at increasing participants    involvement even more. On the one hand  interest could be instigated  through  more  feedback of individual results  newsfeed with e.g. study  results and generally intelligible summaries of current publications of  the research area  34 . On the other hand  study participants can be  actively involved in the development of PIA in the context of citizen  science  e.g. SMARAGD project   35 . This encourages participants of  such studies with more direct involvement to stick with the study at  hand  and makes PIA potentially more attractive for participants from  other projects. We are not aware of other comparable systems that aim  for a participatory development approach.  Furthermore  a large number of ECD systems are not free and open   source  which was a further requirement for us to provide transparency  and digital sustainability.  Recent unforeseen developments such as the SARS CoV 2 pandemic  highlight the importance of appropriate and highly flexible systems for  epidemiological research. To be flexible in our implementation  we  developed our own  customised eResearch solution  which supports data  entry by participants and medical staff  with all necessary roles  equally  and focuses on long term usage among the participants through user  engagement with feedback components and   in future   through further  implementation of gamification.  5.Lessons learned and conclusion  PIA is still being improved and several functions will have to be  adapted in future  especially to enhance usability for all users. Addi  tionally  new features for e.g. further study types including random   isation  are planned. Pilot usability tests and ongoing studies indicate  the feasibility of the eResearch system PIA for epidemiological projects   31 . Through the implementation of new studies  new ideas and re  quirements arise and the scope of the system is becoming broader.  Maintainability is one of the most important criteria of software.  Good maintainability makes it possible to quickly adapt to new J. K. Heise et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100931 6 Fig. 2.a  PIA Menu b  Overview with various questionnaires. c  Participant interface for scanning tube barcodes after self sampling of biospecimens.  J. K. Heise et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100931 7requirements and continuous further development including IT security  aspects. One of our lessons learned is to be more far sighted and to take  this criterion better into account. In the further process of development   refactoring work is planned to improve performance and maintain   ability of PIA.  Another criterion is scalability. The initial architecture was chosen to  support scalability. However  the implementation of certain features   including scheduled tasks  made it more difficult to actually achieve it.  We learned that the development team needs a shared vision and un  derstanding of the software architecture to also achieve its goals in the  long term.  In addition  we aim to expand our end to end testing in order to  detect errors at an early stage and to minimise the manual testing effort.  Furthermore  evaluations of user acceptance have shown that user  navigation might benefit from an even more intuitive design. To in  crease long term adherence by study participants  we plan to implement  more feedback for participants and tailored gamification features.  Where possible  we assess performance indicators and user experi   ence in epidemiological studies using PIA and results inform future  software versions. During the development process  the integration of  the eResearch system PIA into existing IT systems e.g. SORMAS or  NatCoEDC posed a challenge due to the need for close cooperation be  tween different IT companies and the adaption of PIA to different system  structures. This should be considered in terms of time and organisation.  The main lesson learned from developing PIA includes that the  integration of various experts are paramount who embody sufficient  understanding in information technology  IT security  data protection   user experience  scientific methods  epidemiology and biomedicine  while bridging differences in work style  methods and terminologies of  these different disciplines. Their absence would result in underestima   tion of time and resources needed for building such a comprehensive  eResearch system.  Authors   contributions  All authors have made a substantial  direct  intellectual contribution  to this manuscript.  JKH and SC  Conceptualised the software as Product Owner and  drafted the manuscript.  YK and SS  Advised on several features of the software  conceptualisation.  ME  Designed first architecture of the software.  RD  Developed architecture of the software.  GK  Provided epidemiological expertise and advice.  All authors  Read and approved the final manuscript.  What was already known on the topic    A variety of electronic data capture systems are available that  facilitate data collection and improve data quality in epidemiological  studies or clinical settings.    For data collection in long term studies  compliance of the partic   ipants is paramout  for specific research  the possibility for immediate  response in case of incident health events or symptomatic biosampling is  crucial  hence  a customised  but flexible eResearch system is needed.  What this study adds    We present the conceptual design of the eResearch system PIA   Prospective Monitoring and Management Application  meeting the  requirements of a wide range of epidemiological projects.    The software solution is characterised by flexibility in content   comprehensive options for questionnaire implementation  many func  tions relevant to epidemiological research  role concept  integration of  biosamples  and a high standard of data protection and IT security. Declaration of competing interest  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial  interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence  the work reported in this paper.  Acknowledgements  The development of PIA was funded by the Federal Ministry of Ed  ucation and Research under the grant number 01KA1710 and also  supported by the DZIF  German Centre for Infection Research   the  Helmholtz Association  the Ministry for Science and Culture of Lower  Saxony and the Ministry for social issues  health and equality  Nie  ders achsisches Ministerium f r Soziales  Gesundheit und  Gleichstellung .  We sincerely thank the  PIA Team   from Helmholtz Centre for  Infection Research in Braunschweig for designing the application and  for all the organisational and technical work they have done.  We greatly acknowledge the support of the Hannover study center of  the Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research for enabling the conduct of  the first PIA study within the German National Cohort  NAKO  and for  the support in the conception of the application.  We are grateful for the work of Sven Ove W ahling  who assisted with  the conceptualisation of the basic design of the software and provided  technical  organisational support.  We also thank all users of PIA  participants and professional roles   for giving us feedback.  Furthermore  we would like to thank all developers of the Conventic  GmbH  who built the tool and were always available to help with  technical questions. A special thanks goes to Adrian Karsten  who  developed the very first version of PIA.  Appendix ASupplementary data  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https   doi.  org 10.1016 j.imu.2022.100931 .  References   1 Morton LM  Cahill J  Hartge P. Reporting participation in epidemiologic studies  a  survey of practice. Am J Epidemiol 2006 163 197  203. https   doi.org 10.1093   aje kwj036 .   2 Suess T  Remschmidt C  Schink SB  et al. Comparison of shedding characteristics of  seasonal influenza virus  sub types and influenza A H1N1  pdm09  Germany   2007 2011. PLoS One 2012 7 12  e51653. https   doi.org 10.1371 journal.  pone.0051653 .   3 Anderson K  Burford O  Emmerton L. Mobile health apps to facilitate self care  a  qualitative study of user experiences. PLoS One 2016 11 5  e0156164. https   doi.  org 10.1371 journal.pone.0156164 .   4 Blumenberg C  Barros AJ. Electronic data collection in epidemiological research.  The used of REDCap in the Pelotas birth cohorts. Appl Clin Inf 2016 7 3  672  81.  https   doi.org 10.4338 ACI 2016 02 RA 0028 .   5 Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft  DFG . Leitlinien zur Sicherung guter  wissenschaftlicher Praxis Kodex. https   www.dfg.de download pdf foerderung   rechtliche rahmenbedingungen gute wissenschaftliche praxis kodex gwp.pdf .   Accessed 1 October 2021 .   6 German National Cohort  GNC  Consortium. The German National Cohort aims   study design and organization. Eur J Epidemiol 2014 29 371  82. https   doi.org   10.1007 s10654 014 9890 7 . .  Accessed 20 February 2019 .   7 Nationale Kohorte e.V.  Datenschutz  und IT Sicherheitskonzept der  Gesundheitsstudie NAKO  Version 2.37  2015. https   nako.de wp content uplo  ads 2015 09 Datenschutzkonzept NAKO Gesundheitsstudie v2.37 2015 12 03.  pdf  Accessed 28 February 2019 .   8 F ahnrich C  Denecke K  Adeoye OO  et al. Surveillance and Outbreak response  management system  SORMAS  to support the control of the ebola virus disease  outbreak in west africa. Euro Surveill 2015 20 21071. https   doi.org 10.2807   1560 7917.es2015.20.12.21071 .   9 Tom Aba D  Toikkanen SE  Gl ockner S  et al. User evaluation indicates high quality  of the surveillance outbreak response management and analysis system  SORMAS   after field deployment in Nigeria in 2015 and 2018. Stud Health Technol Inf 2018   258 253  233  7.   10  Beyer C  Remschmidt C  an der Heiden M  et al. Internet based syndromic  monitoring of acute respiratory illness in the general population of Germany  J. K. Heise et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100931 8weeks 35 2011 to 34 2012. Euro Surveill 2014 19 4  1  11. https   doi.org   10.2807 1560 7917.ES2014.19.4.20684 .   11  L. Goerlitz  K. Tolksdorf  U. Buchholz et al.  berwachung von COVID 19 durch  Erweiterung der etablierten Surveillance f r Atemwegsinfektionen.  Bundesgesundheitsblatt 64  2021   395 402. doi  10.1007 s00103 021 03303 2.   12  LimeSurvey. https   www.limesurvey.org de .  Accessed 10 February 2022    Accessed 10 February 2022 .   13  secuTrial    for your clinical research. www.secutrial.com .  Accessed 19 October  2021   Accessed 19 October 2021 .   14  REDCap    research electronic data capture. https   projectredcap.org .  Accessed  16 October 2021   Accessed 16 October 2021 .   15  Harris PA  Taylor r  Payne J  et al. Research electronic data capture  REDCap    a  metadata driven methodology and workflow process for providing translational  research informatics support. J Biomed Inf 2009 42 2  377  81. https   doi.org   10.1016 j.jbi.2008.08.010 .   16  Garcia KKS  Abrah  ao AA. Research development using REDCap software. Healthc  Inform Res 2021 27 4  341  9. https   doi.org 10.4258 hir.2021.27.4.341 .   17  Castor. https   www.castoredc.com .  Accessed 5 September 2021   Accessed 10  February 2022 .   18  Xclinical  Proudly part of the EvidentIQ Group. Meet marvin EDC. https   xclinica  l.com clinical data management  .  Accessed 10 October 2021 .   19  OpenClinica. https   www.openclinica.com .  Accessed 10 February 2022 .   20  L obe M  Meineke F  Winter A. Scenarios for using OpenClinica in academic clinical  trials. Stud Health Technol Inf 2019 25 8  211  5.   21  Climedo. https   climedo.de .  Accessed 10 February 2022   Accessed 10 February  2022 .   22  MyCap  mobilizing the participant voice. https   projectmycap.org .  Accessed 19  October 2021   Accessed 19 October 2021 .   23  ODK. Collect data anywhere. https   getodk.org .  Accessed 19 October 2021    Accessed 19 October 2021 .   24  Capterra. https   www.capterra.com.de .  Accessed 22 February 2022   Accessed  22 February 2022 .  25  Grier RA  Bangor A  Kortum P  Peres SC. The system usability Scale  beyond  standard usability testing. Proc Hum Factors Ergon Soc Annu Meet 2013 57 1    187 91. https   doi.org 10.1177 1541931213571042 .   26  Stackoverflow. Developer survey results. https   insights.stackoverflow.  com survey 2018  technology .  Accessed 12 February 2021   Accessed 12  February 2021 .   27  Vaughan Nichols SJ. What is Docker and why is it so darn popular . https   www.  zdnet.com article what is docker and why is it so darn popular  .  Accessed 1  March 2021   Accessed 1 March 2021 .   28  More KA  Chandran P. Native vs hybrid apps. Int J Curr Trends Eng Res  IJCTER   2016 2 6  563  72.   29  Ejima K. Showdown  MySQL8 vs PostgreSQL. https   hackernoon.com showdown   mysql 8 vs postgresql 10 3fe23be5c19e .  Accessed 1 March 2019   Accessed 1  March 2021 .   30  Hoffmann W  Latza U  Baumeister SE  et al. Guidelines and recommendations for  ensuring good epidemiological practice  GEP   a guideline developed by the  German society for epidemiology. Eur J Epidemiol 2019 34 301  17. https   doi.  org 10.1007 s10654 019 00500 x .   31  J. Ortmann  J. K. Heise  C. Fr omke et. al.  Suitability and user acceptance of  eResearch system  prospective monitoring and management app  PIA      the  example of an epidemiological study on infectious diseases.  Manuscript in  preparation .   32  Gornyk D  Harries M  Gl ockner S  et al. SARS COV 2 seroprevalence in Germany   a  population based sequential study in five regions. Dtsch Arztebl Int 2021 118   824 31. https   doi.org 10.3238 arztebl.m2021.0364 .   33  SORMAS  OGD COVID 19   fall    Kontaktpersonen Management im  OGD. https     www.sormas oegd.de .  Accessed 5 February 2022   Accessed 5 February 2022 .   34  Looyestyn J  Kernot J  Boshoff K  et al. Does gamification increase engagement  with online programs  A systematic review. PLoS One 2017 12 3 . https   doi.org   10.1371 journal.pone.0173403 .   35  Den Broeder L  Devilee J  Van Oers H  et al. Citizen Science for public health.  Health Promot Int 2018 33 3  505  14. J. K. Heise et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

