Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100935 Available online 1 April 2022 2352 9148   2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY NC ND license   http   creativecommons.org licenses by  nc nd 4.0   .Statistical analysis of COVID 19 infection severity in lung lobes from  chest CT  Mehdi Yousefzadeha b 1  Mozhdeh Zolghadric 1  Masoud Hasanpourd  Fatemeh Salimie   Ramezan Jafarif  Seyed Mehran Vaziri Bozorgg  Sara Haselih   Abolfazl Mahmoudi Aqeel Abadie  Shahrokh Naseric  Mohammadreza Ayd e   Mohammad Reza Nazem Zadehd e    aDepartment of Physics  Shahid Beheshti University  Tehran  Iran  bSchool of Computer Science  Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences  IPM   Tehran  Iran  cDepartment of Medical Physics  School of Medicine  Mashhad University of Medical Sciences  Mashhad  Iran  dResearch Center for Molecular and Cellular Imaging  Tehran University of Medical Sciences  Tehran  Iran  eMedical Physics and Biomedical Engineering Department  Tehran University of Medical Sciences  TUMS   Tehran  Iran  fDepartment of Radiology and Health Research Center Baqiyatallah University of Medical Sciences  Tehran  Iran  gDepartment of Radiology  Kasra Hospital  Tehran  Iran  hChronic Respiratory Diseases Research Center  National Research Institute of Tuberculosis and Lung Diseases  NRITLD   Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences  and Health Services  Tehran  Iran    ARTICLE INFO   Keywords   Statistical analysis  COVID 19  CT scan  Lung lobes segmentation  Probability density function  Support vector machine ABSTRACT   Detection of the COVID 19 virus is possible through the reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction  RT   PCR  kits and computed tomography  CT  images of the lungs. Diagnosis via CT images provides a faster  diagnosis than the RT PCR method does. In addition to low false negative rate  CT is also used for prognosis in  determining the severity of the disease and the proposed treatment method. In this study  we estimated a  probability density function  PDF  to examine the infections caused by the virus. We collected 232 chest CT of  suspected patients and had them labeled by two radiologists in 6 classes  including a healthy class and 5 classes of  different infection severity. To segment the lung lobes  we used a pre trained U Net model with an average Dice  similarity coefficient  DSC  greater than 0.96. First  we extracted the PDF to grade the infection of each lobe and  selected five specific thresholds as feature vectors. We then assigned this feature vector to a support vector  machine  SVM  model and made the final prediction of the infection severity. Using the T Test statistics  we  calculated the p value at different pixel thresholds and reported the significant differences in the pixel values. In  most cases  the p value was less than 0.05. Our developed model was developed on roughly labeled data without  any manual segmentation  which estimated lung infection involvements with the area under the curve  AUC  in  the range of  0.64  0.87 . The introduced model can be used to generate a systematic automated report for  individual patients infected by COVID 19.    1.Introduction  SARS COV 2 infectious virus was identified by the World Health  Organization and now is recognized as COVID  19  1 2 . The current  gold standard of its diagnosis is the reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction  RT PCR  test  which is a specific molecular diagnosis  on respiratory specimens  throat swab nasopharyngeal swab   3 . Many  studies have reported a higher sensitivity for evaluations based on  computed tomography  CT  than RT PCR test  4 . Although the CT scan  of chest is more expensive and less accessible than PCR test for the   Corresponding author. Research Center for Molecular and Cellular Imaging  Tehran University of Medical Sciences  Tehran  Iran.  E mail addresses  yousefzadeh.meh gmail.com  M. Yousefzadeh   mozhdeh.zolghadri80 gmail.com  M. Zolghadri   hasanpour.masoud gmail.com   M. Hasanpour   salimifateme13 gmail.com  F. Salimi   rezajafari201089 gmail.com  R. Jafari   v mehran yahoo.com  S.M. Vaziri Bozorg   sarahaseli gmail.  com  S. Haseli   a mahmoudia alumnus.tums.ac.ir  A. Mahmoudi Aqeel Abadi   naserish mums.ac.ir  S. Naseri   Mohammadreza ay tums.ac.ir  M. Ay    mnazemzadeh tums.ac.ir  M. R. Nazem Zadeh .    1 These authors contributed equally to this work.  Contents lists available at ScienceDirect  Informatics in Medicine Unlocked  u   zkw  s yo kr o     1ow  o to 1m y2w m k o2ty   https   doi.org 10.1016 j.imu.2022.100935  Received 23 February 2022  Received in revised form 28 March 2022  Accepted 29 March 2022   

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100935 2patients with lung infections  a fast and accurate measurement of the  infection severity has a prognostic value and direct influence on pa  tient  s treatment  which is not the case by a simple RT PCR test  5 8 .  Univariate and multivariate analyses have evaluated the role of CT in  prognosis of the patients with COVID 19. The results showed that  infection scores extracted from CT images are highly correlated with  laboratory findings and disease severity. This can be useful in speeding  up the diagnostic process in symptomatic cases  9 . COVID 19 related  infections appear on CT images of the chest with various patterns   including ground glass opacity  GGO   consolidation  crazy paving  etc.   10 . Most lesions are distributed in the peripheral or sub pleural area.  In addition  the lower lobes are more frequently infected than the upper  and middle lobes  11 .  Segmentation of the lung lobes can provide useful information  regarding the location of different infections  thus  a better diagnosis  and prognosis can be obtained from the results of the segmented lobes   12 14 .  Numerous research in prediction of COVID 19 has been carried out  by the means of machine learning and deep learning  15 16 . Using deep  feature maps of chest CT images  a system for detection of the infection  severity in COVID 19  For two different classes  severe vs. mild  has  been introduced called COVIDC  17 . However  in most studies  the  entire lung image was used to predict an infection severity globally  with  no local prediction across the individual lung lobes  18 .  In this study  we gathered a Chest CT dataset and labeled it with  several classes of infection severity in each lobe. Utilizing a workflow of  machine learning methods  we aimed to predict the infection severity of  each lobe. In summary  the main advantages and novelties of this study  are as follows     Internal dataset was collected and the severity of lung infection in six  classification classes was prepared.    A U Net model with trained weight was used for lobe segmentation.    By segmenting the lung lobes in CT images and using the probability  density function  PDF  in five specific intensities  a feature vector  was obtained for each lobe with no dependence on the size or  number of voxels in each of the five lung lobes.    The resulting vector was given to a support vector machine model to  predict how severely each lung lobe was affected by a lung infection.    Finally  the area under the curve  AUC  score of each of the severity  classes of lung involvement infection was reported.  In the following part of this article  we described the data collection  and label assigning. Then  we explained the statistical tools for esti  mating the PDF and the proposed machine learning model. Subse   quently  we presented the results of the PDF estimation and the SVM  classification  followed by discussing the results and summarizing the  findings. We ultimately addressed the limitations and proposed future  works.  2.Methods and materials  In this study  we used 186 CT volumes to train the proposed machine  learning prediction model and 46 CT volumes to evaluate it. To segment  the lung lobes  a deep learning model was used  19   which is explained  in the following section. Next  we estimated a PDF of pixel intensities for  each lobe  by analyzing which  we obtain a feature vector for each lung  lobe to predict the severity of infection with the help of a SVM model.  2.1. Estimate the severity of infection in each lung lobe  According to the standard systematic report on Radiology Assistant   20  and Rad2share  the percentage of infection was determined by the  number of points 0 to 5  Table 1 . According to the experience and  expertise in interpreting CT images of the lungs and mastering the  sectional anatomy of different areas of the chest  the radiologists visually and approximately estimated the percentage of involvement  and the type of infection  especially GGO and consolidation  in each  lobe as a standard systematic report.  2.2. Datasets  CT dataset of 232 patients  female  male  97  135  average age  46  years  were obtained from Ghiassi Hospital in Tehran  Alexion 16 slice  CT  TOSHIBA Medical Systems . The images were reported by a radi  ologist and the patient identity was removed from the images to protect  the patient  s privacy. Also  an official license was obtained from the  supervisor and the head of the department to use the hospital data in  research. Moreover  an ethics license has been obtained from the ethics  committee of the university for the data acquisition and management.  Using a pre trained U Net method  we segmented the lung lobes in  the CT dataset of 232 vol and 30 157 slices  then the severity of infection  was labeled in each lung lobe. Furthermore  a manual segmentation for  the lung lobes was performed  only for 35 CT volumes as it is a labor   intensive task  to validate the performance of the pre trained U Net  method used in segmenting the lung lobes on our data  We did not  perform any retraining for this segmentation method as the pre trained  model performed quite well on our data . Finally  80  of the data  232  CT scans dataset with the severity labels  was used for training  and the  remaining 20  was used to evaluate the machine learning prediction  model. The number of lobes with different levels of infection is pre  sented in Table 2.  2.3. CT image acquisition  Chest volumes had been obtained in the supine position by the  Toshiba Alexion 16 slice CT scanner in low dose exposure condition  MA  minimum  with the image of 512  512 and the cut thickness of 2 mm.  Thick metal objects were removed from the chest zone to prevent metal  artifacts in CT images. The collected CT volumes contain an average of  130 slices.  2.4. Lung lobes segmentation  We used a pre trained model presented in Ref.  19  to segment the  lung lobes. This model utilized an R231 U Net to categorize all the pixels  identified inside the lung in one of the five lobes. CIP  Chest Imaging  Platform  is an open source lung segmentation tool based on threshold  and morphological operations. The Dice similarity coefficient  DSC  of  this network is reported 0.97  0.05 for standard approaches. However   to validate the performance of lobe segmentation on our dataset  we Table 1  Percentage of infection equivalent to the points of infection.   Number of points involved in infection Percentage of infection  0 points 0   1 point D5   2 points 5 25   3 points 25 50   4 points 50 75   5 points 75 100    Table 2  Number of lobes involved in COVID 19 infections in our dataset.   Number of points involved in infection Number of lobes  0 points 361  1 point 254  2 points 327  3 points 149  4 points 56  5 points 13  M. Yousefzadeh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100935 3manually segmented the lung lobes in a number of images and evaluated  the segmentation results of the model by calculating the DSC.  For semi automatic segmentation of the lung lobes  imaging volumes  of 35 patients in DICOM format were fed to the 3D Slicer software2 from  the CIP module  Chest Imaging Platform  into the section  Interactive  Lobe Segmentation   and the desired images were selected  then  Label  Map volume   was created for the image collection. Moreover  in the  section  Fisser Volume section    a file was created for the set of imported  images. A Gaussian filter was activated for smoothing the image edges.  In the option section  the image dimensions and the work speed were  customized by a skilled expert. Sagittal images were selected  and the  lung lobes were segmented with assigning five different colors to each of  the five lung lobes. The segmented images were inspected by two radi  ologists for accuracy and manually edited by two skilled radiography  residents. To edit the segmented images in the 3D Slicer software  the  images were entered in the  Segment Editor   and the editing was per  formed. At the end  the labeled images from the  Save   module were  archived in a desired address with the  .nrrd  . image format.  2.5. Pre processing  In the first stage  data preparation was performed to unify the data  and incomplete or distorted data were deleted  e.g.  the volumes with no  breathing confinement . Image pixel intensities were mapped to the  range of   1024  150 . This was performed by data clipping and win  dowing functions  i.e.  with setting the window level and window width  values to 1500 and  600  respectively .  2.6. Statistical analysis and machine learning methods  To manage errors related to the data scale  type  and size  an efficient  tool should not depend on the lobe size. To address this  we performed a  one point statistical analysis for generating a PDF of intensities of the  lobe infections. If there is a bright area associated with an infection  the  PDF of the image pixel intensities gives a great number to reflect a high  level of infection severity in the lobe of interest. In addition  for each  level of infection involvement  0 5   its PDF of image intensities was  compared with the PDF of one incremental unit greater level of infection   1 6   which was also separately performed for five lung lobes alto  gether. The PDF was calculated for 50 different points with equal dis  tances in the range of   1024  150  and the p values for these points in  each graph were calculated.  We used a SVM model for the aim of data classification. In the pro  posed SVM model  we used a nonlinear radial basis function  RBF   kernel. Also  due to the non uniformity of the data in different classes in  the SVM model  we used a weight for each class so that the non   uniformity of the samples does not bias at the discretion of a partic   ular class. Finally  we used the output of the PDF estimated for each lobe  at five specific thresholds and constructed a feature vector with a length  of five so that the SVM model can detect the severity of infection in each  class. Furthermore  the feature vector was standardized in such a way  that for each column of these five features  the average value was zero  and the standard deviation was normalized to one for different samples.  In the SVM model  because the total amount of data in the 5 point class  was small and it was not possible to train and evaluate this class  adequately  we merged it with the 4 point class. Therefore  the new 4   point class aimed to diagnose lobes with 50 100  involvement of a  lobe in the CODID   19  related infection.  We used the package  scipy.stats.ttest ind   in Python 3.7.9 to  calculate the t test statistics. In addition  to draw diagrams and results   the package  matplotlib   was used. The  scikit learn package   was also  used to train the SVM model  21 . 3.Result  3.1. Lung lobes segmentation  We fed the image of 232 cases reported by the radiologist to the pre   trained deep learning U Net model for lobe segmentation. To estimate  the severity of infection in each lobe  the images were tagged by two  radiology residents. By analyzing the PDF  we obtained a feature vector  for each lobe. Finally  by utilizing a SVM model  we predicted the  severity of infection in all five lung lobes.  The pixels of each lobe were extracted from 3D CT volumes of the  lung  19 . The DSC was calculated for 35 lung CT volumes with the lobes  labeled by a semi automatic method subsequently edited manually by a  radiologist  reported in Table 3 for each lobe . The average of all DSC  was greater than 0.96. Note that the DSC of the middle lobe was smaller  than the other lobes due to the difficulty in distinguishing the middle  lobe from others by the radiologist and also the deep learning model.  The output of the lobe segmentation model for a sample lung CT image is  shown in Fig. 1.  3.2. Statistical analysis results  The PDF of pixels intensities at six different degrees of infection  0 5  points  are plotted in Fig. 2  which manifests a significant difference  between them. Fig. 3 shows the p value of T Test statistics between  different categories of lung involvement for all lobes together  The  dashed black lines show the thresholds that we used in the SVM model .  Fig. 4 suggests a significant difference between PDF of infection in  tensities for five lung lobes separately  demonstrating that our proposed  method can provide adequate differentiation between different config   urations of the infections per lobe. As we see in Fig. 4  there was a sig  nificant difference between the two groups with the degree of infection 4  and 5  because some of each of the five lobes did not happen to undergo  a level 5 infection  but some of the other lobes did. The best threshold  values associated with the lowest p values  i.e.  the most significant  differences  of each comparison are given in Table 4. In most cases  the  confidence intervals for significant differences were more than 95 .  Also  with all infection categories in each lobe  the p value was 0.21   confidence interval of 67    but when considering all infection cate  gories and all lobes together  the significant difference became much  more apparent. Finally  the difference between the intensities in two  right upper and left lower lobes was less significant than the other three  lobes.  3.3. SVM model for data classification  We trained the SVM model expressed in the method section and the  five thresholds selected with the most significant differences at different  intervals of pixel intensity  Fig. 3 . The model was trained on 80  of the  data and evaluated on 20  of the rest  test set . In addition  due to the  small number of instances  the 5 point class was merged with the 4 point  one. For the output of the test set  a diagram of the Receiver Operating  Characteristic  ROC  curve is depicted in Fig. 5.  along with the AUC  of  the ROC  values of the final accuracy report in each case. As in Fig. 5  we  perhaps see the highest accuracy for the 0 point versus  4 5   point  classes. The lowest results were achieved for the 1 point and the 2 point  Table 3  Average  mean  standard error  of Dice similarity coefficient  DSC  of the  segmentation model for each lung lobe applied on the 35 CT volumes.   Lung Lobes Right  Upper Right  Middle Right  Lower Left  Upper Left  Lower  Lobe Segmentation  DSC  mean   standard error  0.969   0.036 0.921   0.072 0.971   0.050 0.982   0.015 0.981   0.018   2 https   www.slicer.org   version 4.11.0. M. Yousefzadeh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100935 4classes  where their PDF assimilated the PDF of immediate different  levels of infection with a lower probability of separation.  4.Discussion  Due to a high prevalence of the recently epidemic COVID 19 and the  occurrence of infectious symptoms on the lung CT images  the use of  diagnostic tools based on deep machine learning approaches has an  important and prominent role in the field of diagnostic imaging  22 . In  this study  we used a deep learning model with U Net architecture to segment the lung lobes from the source  19   which showed a promising  result quite similar to manual labeling.  Most statistical studies to evaluate the severity of infection seek to  find a link between CT findings and clinical and laboratory attributes   but due to small available populations  generalization of the results is  often limited. In a study in 2020  using  Pearson  s correlation test and  multivariate analysis curves have yielded a score of relationship be  tween patients   clinical findings  examining tests  and chest CT images.  Promisingly  CT images were found capable to predict the mortality  from the disease  which could aid specifying the therapeutic approaches  Fig. 1.Lobe segmentation in three different views. The top row shows the CT images and bottom row represents the five segmented lobes.   Fig. 2.Probability density function of pixels intensities at different levels of involvement  degrees of infection . The bar at each point represents the standard  deviation of the mean for pixels intensities. M. Yousefzadeh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100935 5 Fig. 3.The p value between different categories of lung involvement for all lobes together. The dashed black lines show the thresholds that we used in the  SVM model.  Fig. 4.Significant differences between PDF of infection intensities for different lobes  top left  between two categories with infection degrees of 0 and 1  top right   between two categories with infection degrees of 1 and 2  bottom left  between two categories with infection degrees of 2 and 3  and bottom right  between two  categories with infection degrees of 3 and 4.  Table 4  Minimum p values for each degree of infection compared with one level higher for five individual lobes and for all lobes together.   p value Right Upper Lobe Right Middle Lobe Right Lower Lobe Left Upper Lobe Left Lower Lobe All Lobes  0 vs. 1 point 0.12 0.03 0.09 0.04 0.21 10 4  1 vs. 2 points 10 5 0.0001 0.0221 0.007 10 5 10 13  2 vs. 3 points 0.092 0.18 0.0003 0.054 0.005 10 8  3 vs. 4 points 0.185 0.105 0.021 0.094 0.095 0.008  4 vs. 5 points           0.093  M. Yousefzadeh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100935 6for the patients  23 . Previous research has focused on the severity of  total lung infection  as well as predicting the severity of disease growth  and death from CT images. Hu  Yiqi  et al. showed that Chest CT findings  in patients who died of COVID 19 worsened with a moderate positive  correlation between CT severity and inflammatory factors associated  with leucocytes  neutrophils  and IL 2R  24 . In another work  Huang   Lu  et al.  25  showed that the quantification of lung opacification in  COVID 19 measured on Chest CT by using a commercially available  deep learning based tool was significantly different among groups with  different clinical severity. In this work  we focused on more details and  tried to predict the severity of infection in each lobe without segmen   tation labeling. Bin Li et al.  26  presented a method for segmentation of  ground glass opacity  GGO  and juxta vascular nodules that showed  weak edges with inhomogeneous intensity characteristic. They used an  adaptive local area energy model with a PDF based on a similarity dis  tance and a dynamic multi feature clustering method. Their proposed  method outperformed some previous segmentation methods.  Numerous research has been done in the field of machine learning  and deep learning in COVID 19 prediction. Yousefzadeh et al.  15   presented a deep learning framework called AI CORONA as a radiolo   gist s assistant to diagnose COVID 19. Using an EfficientNetB3 based  feature extractor  their proposed method outperforms the  state of the art models and experts. In another study  Mukul Singh et al.   16  used a deep learning model with architecture VGG16  Visual Ge  ometry Group from Oxford  to extract features from CT images. Feature  selection was performed using principal component analysis  PCA . For  the final classification  four classifiers  i.e.  deep convolutional neural  network  CNN   Extreme Learning Machine  ELM   Consecutive Online  ELM  and the bagging ensemble with SVM  were compared  where the  latter achieved the best classification performance  with an accuracy of  95.7   precision of 95.8   AUC of 0.958  and an F1 score of 95.3  . In a  related study  Shan  Fei  et al.  18  developed an in depth learning  model that first segmented the entire lung infection and predicted the  severity of the whole lung infection. The accuracy of predicting the  severity of infection in the best case of the methods studied in this work  was reported to be 73.4 . In a study  Kelei He and his colleagues pre  sented a multi task multi instance deep neural network  called M2  U Net  for assessment of COVID 19 by performing segmentation of the lung lobes. Employing a hierarchical multi instance learning strategy  a  lung lobe segmentation has been carried out  including a decoder  module with a DSC of 0.785  27 . Filipe T.et al.  used a fully regularized  V Net  FRV  Net   where a 3D CNN was trained end to end to segment  the five lung lobes. The results of this work were used in computer aided  diagnosis  CAD  systems related to pulmonary diseases with an average  DSC of 0.93 per lobe  28 . Using deep feature maps of chest CT images   Wajid Arshad Abbasi et al.  17  presented a COVID 19 severity predic   tion system for two different classes  severe vs. mild  called COVIDC   COVID 19 detection using CT scan . In this approach  they utilized  various pre trained CNN based models in ImageNet to obtain feature  maps and surface learning algorithms such as SVM to obtain the final  training model. They reached an overall accuracy of 86  along with a  generalization performance with F1 score of 0.94 and an AUC  of the  ROC  of 0.98. In a research work  a U Net neural network was used for  the segmentation of five lung lobes with an average DSC greater than  0.96.  The aim of this study was to determine the severity of infection ac  cording to the PDF of the intensity of infections  which was studied both  in general for all lobes and also separately for each lobe. We used sta  tistical tools based on the PDF  and the features related to the severity of  infection were extracted from 232 CT volumes in six classes with  different levels of infection. The advantage of this method was its  independency on the size of the lobes and its management of errors  related to the data scale and size. We observed that the pixel values  above  800 in normal lungs were associated with pulmonary arteries.  With increasing lung involvement in each lobe  it was observed that the  probability of distribution in an interval of   1024   800  decreased.  Due to the clear areas created by the infection  this distribution  increased in an interval of   800 0 . By calculating the amount of p   value in six levels of lung infection  we concluded that there was a sig  nificant difference in pixels with a value of  900 due to lesser air in the  lung lobes that involved with an infection and the pixel intensities  greater than  800 due to infections with different densities  the higher  the infection density  the brighter the image in the infected area   would  show more significant differences. It should also be noted that a smaller  number of samples in each category would lead to a greater standard  deviation and weaker power of the method to detect significant differ   ences. For example  it was difficult to compare the two categories of 4  and 5 point infection levels  due to a small number of samples in our  data. Using the PDF statistical tool  we obtained a feature vector for each  lobe  which was used as an input of the SVM machine learning model.  Different models of machine learning were examined and the SVM  method with RBF kernel was found the most differentiating model. We  also investigated various statistical tools including the two point cor  relation function that were not effective  and for this reason they were  not reported here.  This study had some limitations. The main limitation was the  manpower error in data labeling which would cause some inaccuracies  in analysis. Also  we did not have access to an lung segmentation label to  utilize deep learning models  and we had to perform some manual  segmentations for a few number of cases  in order to merely evaluate the  performance of the used segmentation method on our data. Finally   using deep learning models directly on image data is also associated  with many challenges. For example  the size of the lobes was very  different  and also deep learning models demand a bigger data to train   in order to prevent an overfitting situation.  Several tasks can be suggested as future works. The first is to collect  image segmentation labels to estimate the extent of infection more  accurately at each lobe. The next suggestion is to use a wider range of  one point and multi point statistical tools. Finally  by collecting more  data  we can utilize deep learning models instead of combining statis   tical methods and machine learning approaches.  Fig. 5.ROC curve for different five intensity classes. The 4 point and 5 point  classes were put in a same category. M. Yousefzadeh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 30  2022  100935 75.Conclusion  Segmentation of the lung lobes helps to determine the exact location  of the infection caused by COVID 19. In this study  we used a pre trained  artificial neural network. Combining the estimated probability density  function of the image intensities and a SVM model  we examined the  pixels of CT images for the degree of infection at five different levels. The  results of this study can be used to generate a systematic automated  report for COVID 19.  Data availability statement  The CT dataset has been collected in Ghiassi Hospital  Tehran  Iran. It  cannot be shared publicly because of ethical restrictions and sensitive  human study participant data. The anonymized  non personally iden  tifiable  data is  however  available from the Institutional Data Access  through the Ethics Committee of Ghiassi Hospital for the researchers  who meet the criteria to access the confidential data  contact the cor  responding author at mnazemzadeh tums.ac.ir .  Declaration of competing interest  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial  interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence  the work reported in this paper.  Acknowledgment  This project was partially funded by the Tehran University of Med  ical Sciences  TUMS   the International Campus  IC  Research Affairs.  The CT scan data has been collected in Ghiassi Hospital  Tehran  Iran. It  cannot be shared publicly because of ethical restrictions. The data is   however  available from the Institutional Data Access Ethics Committee  of Ghiassi Hospital  contact via mnazemzadeh tums.ac.ir  for re  searchers who meet the criteria for access to confidential data. The MDH  cohort is also available upon request to the corresponding author s email  address.  References   1 Jiang X  Rayner S  Luo MH. Does SARS CoV 2 has a longer incubation period than  SARS and MERS  J Med Virol 2020 May 92 5  476 8.   2 Lorusso A  Calistri P  Petrini A  Savini G  Decaro N. Novel coronavirus  SARS CoV   2  epidemic  a veterinary perspective. Vet Ital 2020 Feb 12 56 1  5 10.   3 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Interim guidelines for collecting   handling  and testing clinical specimens from persons under investigation  PUIs   for coronavirus disease. 2019. COVID 19 .   4 Ai T  Yang Z  Hou H  Zhan C  Chen C  Lv W  Tao Q  Sun Z  Xia L. Correlation of  chest CT and RT PCR testing for coronavirus disease 2019  COVID 19  in China  a  report of 1014 cases. Radiology 2020 Aug 296 2  E32 40.   5 Abbasi Oshaghi Ebrahim  et al. Diagnosis and treatment of coronavirus disease  2019  COVID 19   laboratory  PCR  and chest CT imaging findings. Int J Surg 2020   79 143 53.   6 Axiaq Ariana  et al. The role of computed tomography scan in the diagnosis of  COVID 19 pneumonia. Curr Opin Pulm Med 2021 27 3  163 8.  7 Fang Yicheng  et al. Sensitivity of chest CT for COVID 19  comparison to RT PCR.  Radiology 2020 296 2  E115 7.   8 Khatami Fatemeh  et al. A meta analysis of accuracy and sensitivity of chest CT and  RT PCR in COVID 19 diagnosis. Sci Rep 2020 10 1  1 12.   9 Francone M  Iafrate F  Masci GM  Coco S  Cilia F  Manganaro L  Panebianco V   Andreoli C  Colaiacomo MC  Zingaropoli MA  Ciardi MR. Chest CT score in COVID   19 patients  correlation with disease severity and short term prognosis. Eur Radiol  2020 Dec 30 12  6808 17.   10  Xu YH  Dong J H  An W M  et al. Clinical and computed tomographic imaging  features of novel coronavirus pneumonia caused by SARS CoV 2. J Infect 2020 80   4  394 400.   11  Pan Y  Guan H  Zhou S  Wang Y  Li Q  Zhu T  Hu Q  Xia L. Initial CT findings and  temporal changes in patients with the novel coronavirus pneumonia  2019 nCoV    a study of 63 patients in Wuhan  China. Eur Radiol 2020 Jun 30 6  3306 9.   12  Shan F  Gao Y  Wang J  Shi W  Shi N  Han M  et al. Lung infection quantification of  COVID 19 in CT images with deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv 2003.04655 2020  Mar 10.   13  Jin S  Wang B  Xu H  Luo C  Wei L  Zhao W  et al. AI assisted CT imaging analysis  for COVID 19 screening  building and deploying a medical AI system in four weeks.  medRxiv 2020 Jan 1.   14  Qi X  Jiang Z  Yu Q  Shao C  Zhang H  Yue H  et al. Machine learning based CT  radiomics model for predicting hospital stay in patients with pneumonia associated  with SARS CoV 2 infection  a multicenter study. medRxiv 2020 Jan 1.   15  Yousefzadeh M  Esfahanian P  Movahed SM  Gorgin S  Rahmati D  Abedini A   Nadji SA  Haseli S  Bakhshayesh Karam M  Kiani A  Hoseinyazdi M. ai corona   radiologist assistant deep learning framework for COVID 19 diagnosis in chest CT  scans. PLoS One 2021 May 7 16 5  e0250952.   16  Singh M  Bansal S  Ahuja S  Dubey RK  Panigrahi BK  Dey N. Transfer  learning based ensemble support vector machine model for automated COVID 19  detection using lung computerized tomography scan data. Med Biol Eng Comput  2021 Apr 59 4  825 39.   17  Abbasi WA  Abbas SA  Andleeb S  Ul Islam G  Ajaz SA  Arshad K  Khalil S  Anjam A   Ilyas K  Saleem M  Chughtai J. COVIDC  an expert system to diag nose COVID 19  and predict its severity using chest CT scans  application in ra diology. Inf Med  Unlocked 2021 Jan 1 23 100540.   18  Shan Fei  et al. Abnormal lung quantification in chest CT images of COVID 19  patients with deep learning and its application to severity prediction. Med Phys  2021 48 4  1633 45.   19  Hofmanninger Johannes  et al. Automatic lung segmentation in routine imaging is  primarily a data diversity problem  not a methodology problem. Eur Radiol Exp  2020 4 1  1 13.   20  https   radiologyassistant.nl chest covid 19 covid19 imaging findings.   21  Kramer O. Scikit learn. InMachine learning for evolution strategies. Cham   Springer  2016. p. 45 53.   22  Oulefki A  Agaian S  Trongtirakul T  Laouar AK. Automatic COVID 19 lung infected  region segmentation and measurement using CT scans images. Pattern Recogn  2021 Jun 1 114 107747.   23  Francone M  Iafrate F  Masci GM  Coco S  Cilia F  Manganaro L  Panebianco V   Andreoli C  Colaiacomo MC  Zingaropoli MA  Ciardi MR. Chest CT score in COVID   19 patients  correlation with disease severity and short term prognosis. Eur Radiol  2020 Dec 30 12  6808 17.   24  Hu Yiqi  et al. Chest CT findings related to mortality of patients with COVID 19  a  retrospective case series study. PLoS One 2020 15 8  e0237302.   25  Huang Lu  et al. Serial quantitative chest CT assessment of COVID 19  a deep  learning approach. Radiology  Cardiothorac Imag 2020 2 2  e200075.   26  Li B  Chen Q  Peng G  Guo Y  Chen K  Tian L  Ou S  Wang L. Segmentation of  pulmonary nodules using adaptive local region energy with probability density  function based similarity distance and multi features clustering. Biomed Eng  Online 2016 Dec 15 1  1 28.   27  He K  Zhao W  Xie X  Ji W  Liu M  Tang Z  Shi Y  Shi F  Gao Y  Liu J  Zhang J.  Synergistic learning of lung lobe segmentation and hierarchical multi instance  classification for automated severity assessment of COVID 19 in CT images. Pattern  Recogn 2021 May 1 113 107828.   28  Ferreira FT  Sousa P  Galdran A  Sousa MR  Campilho A. In  End to end supervised  lung lobe segmentation. In2018 International Joint conference on neural networks   IJCNN . IEEE  2018. p. 1 8. M. Yousefzadeh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

